Algorithmic Impact Assessment Results

Version: 0.10.0
Project Details
1. Name of Respondent
Mike Leahy

2. Job Title
Director General

3. Department
Canada Border Services Agency

4. Branch
Commercial & Trade Branch

5. Project Title
CBSA Assessment and Revenue Management (CARM)

6. Project ID from IT Plan
PRJ-00005304

7. Departmental Program (from Department Results Framework)
PI 10500 Commercial Facilitation and Compliance Program

8. Project Phase
Implementation                                                                                                           [ Points: 0 ]

9. Please provide a project description:
The CBSA’s mandate is to provide integrated border services that support
national security and public safety priorities while facilitating the free flow of
persons and goods that meet all requirements under its program legislation.
Managing the efficient importation of commercial goods into Canada,
including the accurate and effective assessment and collection of duties and
taxes owed to the Government of Canada, is key to the facilitation aspect of
the CBSA’s mandate.

In 2009, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) appeared before the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts (PACP). The OAG noted that CBSA had
difficulty in reconciling information in various reports taken from its tax
program systems, which led to unexplained differences at year-end. The
Committee was told that this was due to information technology systems not
being able to share data. As a result, PACP recommended that the CBSA
provide the Committee with a detailed plan specifying the steps it would take
to improve its tax revenue accounting systems. It is from this
recommendation that the CBSA Assessment and Revenue Management
(CARM) project was created.

The CBSA Assessment and Revenue Management Program (CARM) is a
multi-year transformation initiative that will aid the Government of Canada in
protecting and growing $40 billion a year in revenue for Canadians. In fiscal
year 2022–2023, the CBSA collected $39.7 billion in duties and taxes on
imported goods.

The CARM project is modernizing and simplifying the accounting process
related to imported goods, providing a more efficient means for Trade Chain
Partners (TCPs) (e.g. importers, customs brokers, carriers, freight forwarders,
customs bonded and sufferance warehouse operators, and duty free shop
operators) and the CBSA to interact during the importation process and when
accounting for commercial goods, and when corrections or amendments to
accounting documentation are required.

The CARM System was developed by both CBSA, and third-party consultants,
such as Deloitte and Accenture. Creating a new method to submit
Commercial Accounting Data, and automating certain administrative
processes within the system in order to increase compliance activities, and
modernize and streamline the accounting process for importing commercial
goods into Canada.

The CARM System is a rule-based automated decision system, which uses
automation to generate reports of potentially non-compliant transactions,
using established risking rules; and calculates duties and taxes based on the
goods being imported, according to the Customs Act. In all scenarios, human
intervention, and overriding is possible, and established recourse processes
continue to serve TCPs.

The CARM system will replace manual processes and aging systems, some of
which are more than 30 years old. It is designed to address many issues the
CBSA and TCPs face in the importation process relating to the assessment
and collection of duties and taxes, including:
•inefficiencies resulting from a reliance on manual and, in some instances,
paper-based processes;
•difficulties in collecting on debts owed to the Government of Canada and in
facilitating compliance with the trade rules and regulations governing the
importation of commercial goods into Canada; and
•challenges in navigating overly complex processes and rules related to
commercial accounting and payment of owed amounts, including non-
harmonized payment due dates.

The launch of CARM facilitates the impact of customs activities on Trade
Chain Partners, by modernizing the regulatory framework around managing
import accounting and the payments owed to the Government of Canada.
CARM has been designed to give TCPs improved access to their import
account information with the CBSA, and to make it easier for them to
communicate with the CBSA and remain compliant with commercial goods
accounting requirements. CARM offers TCPs a number of benefits by:
• Eliminating cumbersome and time-consuming paper-based processes (e.g.
TCPs are no longer required to submit paper-based documentation to specific
CBSA officers or locations, which is administratively cumbersome for TCPs
and the Government of Canada alike)
• Providing better tools to improve fairness and consistency in the treatment
of all importers, reducing missed opportunities to apply taxes and/or duties,
thereby reducing revenue leakage (e.g. Previously, the importing process
relied on paper-based accounting and correction which creates inefficiencies,
creating the potential for records to be inadvertently destroyed or misplaced,
and creates challenges to assembling a clear picture of an entity’s compliance
with accounting and payment obligations)
•Offering importers the ability to enroll in commercial programs, submit
accounting documents, and receive notifications through their CARM Client
Portal account (e.g. TCPs now have a centralized portal that streamlines all
commercial interaction in one view)
•Creating harmonized billing cycles (e.g. TCPs now have one comprehensive
monthly payment. The former process prescribed multiple payment due dates
for various amounts, which created confusion for TCPs.)

A Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) has been created for the CARM project,
noting limited administrative risks. The initial PIA was completed for the first
phase of the CARM project that was implemented in January 2016 and then
amended throughout the CARM project lifetime up to the PIA version that was
approved in April 2024. The CARM solution collects and uses commercial
data to enable the CBSA to administer the process of the importation of
commercial goods. The CARM system shares information with the Canada
Revenue Agency, Public Services and Procurement Canada, Innovation
Science and Economic Development, Office of the Auditor General, Canadian
Centre for Cyber Security, Department of Finance, and Statistics Canada.
Information is shared with these partners in accordance with the Customs
Act, Customs Tariff, Special Import Measures Act, Excise Tax Act, Excise Act
and the Excise Act, 2001, Income Tax Act, and the Statistics Act. Subsequent
use and disclosure of this information is restricted by the Privacy Act.

CARM was released in several phases:

Release 0 – R0 (January 2021) moved the Accounts Receivable Ledger (ARL)
(Released in April 2015) to CARM using the latest technology hosted within a
cloud environment.

Release 1 – R1 (May 2021) was the introduction of an internal portal which
set the foundation for case management. The CARM Client Portal also went
live to TCPs importing goods into Canada to complete the following tasks:
view transactions posted to their accounts, make payments by credit card,
online banking or set up pre-authorized debit, request and track the progress
of rulings electronically, and classify goods and estimate duties and taxes.

Release 2 – R2 (May 2024) An internal launch of the CARM system to begin
compliance verification activities with Trade Chain Partners.

Release 3 – R3 (October 2024) The external launch of the CARM system for
importers and other trade chain partners, becoming the official system of
record for imposing or levying duties and taxes. It involved the transition from
CBSA legacy revenue management systems to the new system of record, and
introduced new measures such as Trade Chain Partner registration and
enrolment availability, and increased portal functionality, including: changes to
the Release Prior to Payment (RPP) Program, electronic commercial
accounting declarations that you can correct and adjust, harmonized billing
cycles, new offsetting options, electronic management of appeals and
compliance actions, the ability for resident trade chain partners to register for
a Business Number (BN9), and enrolment in various CBSA commercial
programs.
Release 4 - R4 (August 2025) A significant system maintenance upgrade of
CARM's base software. Also includes some CARM Portal enhancements,
improvements to CBSA operations and increased Trade Chain Partner
efficiency (e.g. increased visibility on program account management status
and business relationships)

The CARM program will continue to transform and modernize the commercial
importation process through future releases, benefitting the Government of
Canada, the trade community, and Canadians.

About The System
10. Please check which of the following capabilities apply to your system.
Risk assessment: Analyzing very large data sets to identify patterns and
recommend courses of action and in some cases trigger specific actions
Process optimization and workflow automation: Analyzing large data sets to
identify and anomalies, cluster patterns, predict outcomes or ways to
optimize; and automate specific workflows
Content generation: Analyzing large data sets to categorize, process, triage,
personalize, and serve specific content for specific contexts

Section 1: Impact Level : 1

Current Score: 28

Raw Impact Score: 33

Mitigation Score: 37
Section 2: Requirements Specific to Impact Level 1
Peer review

None
Gender-based Analysis Plus

None
Notice

None
Human-in-the-loop for decisions

Decisions may be rendered without direct human involvement.
Explanation

In addition to any applicable legal requirement, ensure that a meaningful explanation is published
for common decision results. The explanation must provide a general description of:

   the role of the system in the decision-making process;
   input data, its source and method of collection;
   the criteria used to evaluate input data and the operations applied to process it;
   the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to interpret it in the
   context of the administrative decision; and
   the principal factors behind a decision.

Explanations must also inform clients of relevant recourse options, where appropriate.

Descriptions must be made available in plain language through the Algorithmic Impact
Assessment and discoverable via a departmental website.
Training

None
IT and business continuity management

None
Approval for the system to operate

None
Other requirements

The Directive on Automated Decision-Making also includes other requirements that must be met
for all impact levels.

Link to the Directive on Automated Decision-Making

Contact your institution's ATIP office to discuss the requirement for a Privacy Impact
Assessment as per the Directive on Privacy Impact Assessment.
Section 3: Questions and Answers
Section 3.1: Impact Questions and Answers
Reasons for Automation
1. What is motivating your team to introduce automation into this decision-making process?
(Check all that apply)
Existing backlog of work or cases
Improve overall quality of decisions
Lower transaction costs of an existing program
The system is performing tasks that humans could not accomplish in a
reasonable period of time
Use innovative approaches

2. What client needs will the system address and how will this system meet them? If possible,
describe how client needs have been identified.
The utilization of the CARM system will enable Trade Chain Partners (TCPs) to
meet all of the requirements governing the accounting of commercial goods
imported into Canada, including, but not limited to:
• classifying their commercial goods under the appropriate tariff
classification
• accurately declaring the origin and value of the goods, in accordance with
legislative requirements
• paying the appropriate duties and taxes on the goods
• eliminating cumbersome and time-consuming paper-based processes
• streamlining access to tools and information to enroll in commercial
programs, submit accounting documents, receive electronic notifications and
make electronic payments

The need for better compliance has been demonstrated in many ways
throughout the years. The 2017 Spring Reports of the Auditor General of
Canada to the Parliament of Canada: Report 2 —Customs Duties identified
missing revenues as a result of the self-assessment system used by the
importing community to declare the classification and duties owing, to the
best of their knowledge. Additionally, the CBSA conducted a CARM Client
experience Simulation (CES 2.0) from February to June 2023 where TCPs
participated in a number of simulations of CARM business processes and
interactions. The CBSA identified many client errors in this non-production
simulated environment, highlighting knowledge gaps and the need for further
client education, and building participant readiness for the CARM external
launch in October 2024. Having better compliance when declaring
transactions to the CBSA will reduce the risk of penalties or interest
payments, as more compliance means a more accurate assessment of duties
and taxes. Errors and omissions in customs payments create an unfair
competitive advantage for those not paying the correct amount owed.

3. Please describe any public benefits the system is expected to have.
When importers and other trade chain partners are compliant with applicable
legislation and revenue requirements, the correct amount of duties and taxes
are remitted to the Crown. The CARM system better equips the CBSA to
protect and grow $40 billion a year in revenue for Canadians. Additionally, the
integrity of Canada’s import regime is a public benefit, as CARM ensures a
level playing field for all businesses by providing the CBSA better compliance
and enforcement tools.

4. How effective will the system likely be in meeting client needs?
Very effective                                                                                                               [ Points: +0 ]

5. Please describe any improvements, benefits, or advantages you expect from using an
automated system. This could include relevant program indicators and performance targets.
The system's automated features are strengthening the Agency’s ability to
accurately assess duties and taxes owed on imported goods by further
enabling importers to self-assess and comply with Canada’s trade
requirements through compliance tools and education. Additionally, CARM
allows for TCPs to directly submit accounting declarations to the CBSA, and
for the Agency to calculate and notify the TCP of assessed duties and taxes in
a timely manner. CARM provides expanded reporting and analytical
capabilities beyond what is available without automation.

In the greater context of its trade compliance activities, the CBSA measures
return on investment by comparing the total duties assessed versus the total
expenditures for such activities. In 2022 to 2023, the Agency achieved a return
on investment ratio of 16:1, doubling its target of 8:1. CARM enables the CBSA
to better identify non-compliant transactions by using the new automated
CARM risking rules. Integrating this technology allows the CBSA to narrow it’s
focus on the noncompliant importers. For example, there are now greater data
validation rules (proper classification/excise/GST mapping) which prevents
previous errors as these data elements were not system-validated in legacy
programs. In addition, CARM offers more validation on import permits and
remission orders that are coded for specific commodities, thus ensuring
permits are used for the approved purpose only.

The CBSA will monitor the process of CARM to ensure desired benefits are
realized as planned:
• Reduced administrative burden for Canadian importers and other TCPs (e.g.
percentage of annual payments made using electronic payment methods);
• Increased Government of Canada revenues (e.g. additional revenue
generated per year as a result of improvements in verification approaches and
improved compliance); and,
• Improved CBSA efficiency (e.g. reduced maintenance costs or trade and
revenue management IT systems).

6. Please describe how you will ensure that the system is confined to addressing the client
needs identified above.
The CARM Client Portal allows for Trade Chain Partners (TCPs) who have a
business number and enrolled in CBSA commercial programs to have direct
access to the accounting functions that CBSA uses, allows TCPs to
automatically register and enroll into different commercial programs, view
calculated duties and taxes and payment due dates, receive financial
statements and make electronic payments, and allows for importers to make
appeals and adjustments to their accounting declarations, etc. CARM internal
access oversight controls are managed to ensure specific individuals are
given access to CARM data to perform roles relating to their job, e.g.
compliance monitoring, managing corrections and adjustments, processing
appeals, etc.
CARM has governance bodies in place to review any requests to change
functionality from the original design. The system continues to be assessed
and evaluated as there are some systemic requirements that still need to be
met in order to meet client needs.

7. Please describe any trade-offs between client interests and program objectives that you have
considered during the design of the project.
Extensive consultations with the trade community occurred during the design
phase of the project through working groups, training sessions, and trade
committees which resulted in an agreed approach to deployments occurring
over a number of releases. Trade chain partners (TCPs) made significant
investments to upgrade their systems to align to CARM program requirements
and objectives, and significant time and effort conducting extensive testing of
the new system with the CBSA, and training to use the new portal. CARM is
widely available to all importers and other trade chain partners, using the
CARM client portal that allows TCPs to access, an online portal, to submit
their commercial accounting declarations to the CBSA, manage adjustments
and corrections, and more. After releasing the system, the CBSA provides the
CARM Client Support Helpdesk ensures that TCPs have constant access
support as needed.
8. Have alternative non-automated processes been considered?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

9. If non-automated processes were considered, why was automation identified as the preferred
option?
Risking officers manually assess transactions with conventional tools and a
much smaller set of criteria. Due to the high volume of transactions, this is an
extremely inefficient risking strategy. Continuing to operate with outdated
systems, would lead to missed revenues and limit compliance activities that
the CBSA officers can undertake. Additionally, calculating duties and taxes is
now completed through the CARM system and can be done much more
efficiently than completing the previous paper-based B3 forms.

10. What would be the consequence of not deploying the system?
Service quality is not as high
Service delivery cannot achieve performance targets

Risk Profile
11. Is the project within an area of intense public scrutiny (e.g. because of privacy concerns)
and/or frequent litigation?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

12. Are clients in this line of business particularly vulnerable?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

13. Are stakes of the decisions very high?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

14. Will this project have major impacts on staff, either in terms of their numbers or their roles?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

15. Will the use of the system create or exacerbate barriers for persons with disabilities?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

Project Authority
16. Will you require new policy authority for this project?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

About the Algorithm
17. The algorithm used will be a (trade) secret
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

18. The algorithmic process will be difficult to interpret or to explain
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

About the Decision
19. Please describe the decision(s) that will be automated.
The CARM system delivers outputs to the CBSA using business rules and
mathematical logic including:
• Calculate duties and taxes owed, financial security bonds, penalties, and
interest based on legislative requirements defined through the Customs Act.
• Analyze transactions and identify trade compliance risks through data
provided by Trade Chain Partners as well as financial transactions stored
within CARM, and will create reports of potentially non-compliant
transactions.
• Validate data submitted to ensure that it is correctly entered according to
formatting rules (e.g. syntax errors, etc.)
• Verify TCP registration data against current information in the Accounts
Receivable Ledger (ARL) as well as Client Master Data (CMD), if applicable.
• Notify Trade Chain Partners electronically regarding updates to cases
submitted to CARM, or of validation errors in forms submitted.
• Review transactions/requests submitted by TCPs according to business
rules and determines if CBSA manual intervention and approval by a
delegated CBSA authority is required.
Officers review outputs and make the final decisions.

20. Does the decision pertain to any of the categories below (check all that apply):
Other (please specify)                                                                                                 [ Points: +1 ]

21. Please describe
Border Management: Accounting and risk assessment of import transactions

Impact Assessment
22. Which of the following best describes the type of automation you are planning?
Partial automation (the system will contribute to administrative decision-
making by supporting an officer through assessments, recommendations,
intermediate decisions, or other outputs)                                                                  [ Points: +2 ]

23. Please describe the role of the system in the decision-making process.
The CARM system uses mathematical logic and business rules to deliver the
following examples of outputs to aid CBSA in decision-making:
• Providing compliance assessments based on business rules to CBSA
Officers
• Provide CBSA Officers a list of transactions which require manual
intervention or approval by a delegated CBSA authority
• Notifying clients of decisions rendered by CBSA Officers
• Calculate estimated duties and taxes based on accounting rules and notify
clients of assessed duties and taxes

24. Will the system be making decisions or assessments that require judgement or discretion?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

25. Please describe the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to
process it.
The system uses a set of risk rules that produce transactional lists based on
the criteria in the rules being met or not met. The new risk rules integrated in
CARM were developed based on legislative requirements in the Customs Act.
For example, the officer could decide to use the system to look at transactions
above a certain declared Value for Duty.
These rules were also validated against previous results of trade compliance
verifications and were recently tested during the CARM Client Experience
Simulation (CES 2.0) exercise.
The system also uses importer data for accounting declarations, business
numbers (BNs) registration and enrolment, acceptance of payment, sub-
location enrolment and other system functions.

26. Please describe the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to
interpret it in the context of the administrative decision.
The CARM system will create a list of potentially non-compliant transactions
(shipments imported into Canada) based on the established risk criteria that
can include elements of the Importer’s customs declaration, such as the
value, origin or tariff classification of the goods being imported to Canada.

These lists of transactions will be further reviewed by CBSA officers who will
determine whether further action is needed, which could include a Trade
advisory notice (TAN) or a Compliance validation letter for example. This
helps officers focus on the transactions with a higher potential of
noncompliance.

The CARM system will also provide CBSA with transactions that require
manual intervention or approval by a delegated CBSA authority, which would
include TCP-provided transaction information for the CBSA to make the final
decision.

The CARM system also creates reports according to program and legislative
requirements and provides notification of assessed duties and taxes, using
commercial accounting declaration data submitted by TCP.

27. Will the system perform an assessment or other operation that would not otherwise be
completed by a human?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

28. Is the system used by a different part of the organization than the ones who developed it?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

29. Are the impacts resulting from the decision reversible?
Reversible                                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

30. How long will impacts from the decision last?
Impacts are most likely to be brief                                                                             [ Points: +1 ]

31. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
Impacts are most likely to be brief. If the officer recommends a compliance
activity and this results in reassessments, the client may choose to appeal the
decision and they have recourse mechanisms available to them.

CBSA Officers can decide to discard transactions recommended by the
system and also have the ability to decide which compliance activity to
recommend based on their assessment. Should an importer or business
disagree with a CBSA assessment or decision resulting from a trade
compliance activity may be eligible to apply for a further re-determination or
review using existing recourse mechanisms, which can be found here: https://
www.cbsa-asfc.gc.ca/recourse-recours/
32. The impacts that the decision will have on the rights or freedoms of individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

33. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The CARM system will have little to no impact because it won’t be rendering
decisions regarding commercial importation. Instead, it sorts data relating to
commercial goods being imported into Canada such as Origin, Value or Tariff
Classification of these commercial goods.

The CARM system operates on a ‘post-entry’ verification model. Meaning that
no shipments will be stopped at the border nor will importers be prohibited
from importing their goods as a result of a compliance verification. Rather, the
system will result in helping importers that may not yet be fully compliant as
per the existing legislation and regulations. Identifying such gaps, will lead to
more accurate declaration of goods, regardless of the nature of the goods.

34. The impacts that the decision will have on the equality, dignity, privacy, and autonomy of
individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

35. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The CARM system will have little to no impact since it sorts data relating to
commercial goods being imported into Canada such as Origin, Value or Tariff
Classification of these commercial goods. It does not assess demographic
information of importers.

The compliance verification decisions rendered by an officer, as a result of
using the CARM system, will not impact an individual’s equality, dignity,
privacy or autonomy since it is based on risk rules applied to the commercial
trade data.

36. The impacts that the decision will have on the health and well-being of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

37. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The CARM system operates on a ‘post-entry’ verification model. Meaning that
no shipments will be stopped at the border by using this system. No importer
will be prohibited from importing anything directly, the result of this tool is that
importers will become more compliant with legislation and regulation,
meaning that they declare their goods correctly, regardless of the nature of
the goods.

38. The impacts that the decision will have on the economic interests of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

39. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The CARM system is used to assess compliance, assess and collect duties
and taxes on commercial goods, and to streamline the process for TCPs to
importing commercial goods. By increasing the success rate of trade
compliance activities, this may result in importers having to pay duties and
taxes that may have been undetected otherwise. These same amounts would
have been due if the initial declaration submitted by the importer was correct.
Importers have an obligation to correctly declare the goods that they are
bringing into Canada.

Only clients considered to be non-compliant will have to face a potential
economic impact, which will result in adjusting the amount of duties and
taxes owed to the Government of Canada. This will only impact the small
number of clients who are non-compliant. Errors and omissions in customs
payments create an unfair competitive advantage for those not paying their
fair share.

40. The impacts that the decision will have on the ongoing sustainability of an environmental
ecosystem, will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

41. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The CARM system is fully electronic and will rely very little on paper
documents, having little to no impact on Government utilization of paper
resources and having a negligible impact on the environment.

About the Data - A. Data Source
42. Will the Automated Decision System use personal information as input data?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

43. Have you verified that the use of personal information is limited to only what is directly
related to delivering a program or service?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

44. Is the personal information of individuals being used in a decision-making process that
directly affects those individuals?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

45. Have you verified if the system is using personal information in a way that is consistent
with: (a) the current Personal Information Banks (PIBs) and Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs)
of your programs or (b) planned or implemented modifications to the PIBs or PIAs that take new
uses and processes into account?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

46. Please list relevant PIB Bank Numbers.
CBSA PPU 1501

47. What is the highest security classification of the input data used by the system? (Select one)
Protected B / Protected C                                                                                           [ Points: +3 ]

48. Who controls the data?
Federal government                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]
49. Will the system use data from multiple different sources?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

50. Will the system require input data from an Internet- or telephony-connected device? (e.g.
Internet of Things, sensor)
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

51. Will the system interface with other IT systems?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

52. Who collected the data used for training the system?
Your institution                                                                                                            [ Points: +1 ]

53. Who collected the input data used by the system?
Your institution                                                                                                            [ Points: +1 ]

54. Please describe the input data collected and used by the system, its source, and method of
collection.
The TCP inputs data elements related to program enrolment and registration
such as Importer Name, Address, and contact information. Data elements
may be considered mandatory, optional or conditional. A full list of data
elements can be found in the Electronic Commerce Client Requirements
Document (ECCRD), Chapter 26: Commercial Accounting Declarations,
Appendix D - Data Elements which can be requested here: https://www.cbsa-
asfc.gc.ca/eservices/eccrd-eng.html. These data elements are collected
electronically from the TCP via the CARM Client Portal or through Electronic
Data Interchange (EDI) / Application Programming Interface (API)
transmission.
All electronic records are maintained in the CARM system using the Amazon
Web Services (AWS) Canadian Cloud Service, a dedicated OpenText service in
the AWS Cloud and CBSA's Enterprise Data Warehouse.

About the Data - B. Type of Data
55. Will the system require the analysis of unstructured data to render a recommendation or a
decision?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: 0 ]

Section 3.2: Mitigation Questions and Answers
Consultations
1. Internal Stakeholders (federal institutions, including the federal public service)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

2. Which Internal Stakeholders have you engaged?
Data Governance
Strategic Policy and Planning
Program Policy
Access to Information and Privacy Office
Communications services
TBS Office of the Chief Information Officer
Legal Services
3. External Stakeholders (groups in other sectors or jurisdictions)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

4. Which External Stakeholders have you engaged?
Clients or their Representatives
International Organizations
Governments in other Jurisdictions
Industry

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Data Quality
5. Do you have documented processes in place to test datasets against biases and other
unexpected outcomes? This could include experience in applying frameworks, methods,
guidelines or other assessment tools.
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

6. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

7. Have you developed a process to document how data quality issues were resolved during the
design process?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

8. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

9. Have you undertaken a Gender Based Analysis Plus of the data?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

10. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

11. Have you assigned accountability in your institution for the design, development,
maintenance, and improvement of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

12. Do you have a documented process to manage the risk that outdated or unreliable data is
used to make an automated decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

13. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

14. Is the data used for this system posted on the Open Government Portal?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Procedural
Fairness
15. Does the audit trail identify the authority or delegated authority identified in legislation?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]
16. Does the system provide an audit trail that records all the recommendations or decisions
made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

17. Are all key decision points identifiable in the audit trail?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

18. Are all key decision points within the automated system's logic linked to the relevant
legislation, policy or procedures?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

19. Do you maintain a current and up to date log detailing all of the changes made to the model
and the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

20. Does the system's audit trail indicate all of the decision points made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

21. Can the audit trail generated by the system be used to help generate a notification of the
decision (including a statement of reasons or other notifications) where required?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

22. Does the audit trail identify precisely which version of the system was used for each
decision it supports?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

23. Does the audit trail show who an authorized decision-maker is?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

24. Is the system able to produce reasons for its decisions or recommendations when required?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

25. Is there a process in place to grant, monitor, and revoke access permission to the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

26. Is there a mechanism to capture feedback by users of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

27. Is there a recourse process established for clients that wish to challenge the decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

28. Does the system enable human override of system decisions?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

29. Is there a process in place to log the instances when overrides were performed?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

30. Does the system's audit trail include change control processes to record modifications to the
system's operation or performance?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

31. Have you prepared a concept case to the Government of Canada Enterprise Architecture
Review Board?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Privacy
32. If your system uses or creates personal information, have you undertaken a Privacy Impact
Assessment, or updated an existing one?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

33. Please indicate the following in your answer: Title and scope of the Privacy Impact
Assessment; How the automation project fits into the program; and Date of Privacy Impact
Assessment completion or modification.
Title: CBSA Assessment and Revenue Management (CARM) Privacy Impact
Assessment (PIA)

Date of completion: The initial PIA was completed for the first phase of the
CARM project that was implemented in January 2016 and then amended
throughout the CARM project lifetime up to the PIA version that was approved
in April 2024

Scope: The CARM solution collects and uses personal information pertaining
to certain individuals. The information held within the CARM solution is
mostly commercial in nature: corporate contact information and corporate
business numbers. CARM holds information about importers (domestic and
foreign), trade service advisors, carriers, couriers, duty free shop owners,
warehouse owners and customs brokerages, during the application phase and
once confirmed as business partners. In some cases, the importers or carriers
may be small-scale, sole proprietors and, in those cases, the client identifier
(CRA-issued Business Numbers, Carrier Codes or Business Partner ID) could
be considered to be personal information. Personal information about
business owners is collected during the application phase in order to
establish that the business meets specific requirements

How automation project fits into the program: Client information and financial
transaction information will be stored within CARM and this information may
be used for the assessment of duties and taxes, program enrolment, non-
compliant transactions, and other program requirements.

34. Have you designed and built security and privacy into your systems from the concept stage
of the project?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

35. Is the information used within a closed system (i.e. no connections to the Internet, Intranet
or any other system)?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

36. If the sharing of personal information is involved, has an agreement or arrangement with
appropriate safeguards been established?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

37. Will you de-identify any personal information used or created by the system at any point in
the lifecycle?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]