Algorithmic Impact Assessment Results

Version: 0.10.0
Project Details
1. Name of Respondent
Martin Burtt

2. Job Title
Manager

3. Department
Canada Border Services Agency

4. Branch
Commercial and Trade

5. Project Title
Export Compliance Dashboard

6. Project Phase
Implementation                                                                                                           [ Points: 0 ]

7. Please provide a project description:
The Export Compliance Dashboard provides additional information related to
shipments for export. This is intended to help CBSA Officers perform a risk
assessment and identify potential instances of non-compliance in order to
select shipments for a physical examination or further review.

To do this, the tool compares export declaration information received from
exporters and shippers against historical records to identify shipments that
may have a higher probability of non-compliance and provides an associated
risk probability score, and also identifies when specific data points may be
missing or anomalous.

The tool can be leveraged by CBSA Officers to supplement existing systems
and database checks as well as Officers' knowledge and experience to
support informed decisions on which shipments to examine. This will allow
for more efficient processing of export shipments and will enhance the
Agency’s ability to intercept non-compliant shipments including those
containing stolen vehicles or other forms of contraband.

About The System
8. Please check which of the following capabilities apply to your system.
Risk assessment: Analyzing very large data sets to identify patterns and
recommend courses of action and in some cases trigger specific actions
Process optimization and workflow automation: Analyzing large data sets to
identify and anomalies, cluster patterns, predict outcomes or ways to
optimize; and automate specific workflows
Section 1: Impact Level : 1

Current Score: 30

Raw Impact Score: 30

Mitigation Score: 34
Section 2: Requirements Specific to Impact Level 1
Peer review

None
Gender-based Analysis Plus

None
Notice

None
Human-in-the-loop for decisions

Decisions may be rendered without direct human involvement.
Explanation

In addition to any applicable legal requirement, ensure that a meaningful explanation is published
for common decision results. The explanation must provide a general description of:

   the role of the system in the decision-making process;
   input data, its source and method of collection;
   the criteria used to evaluate input data and the operations applied to process it;
   the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to interpret it in the
   context of the administrative decision; and
   the principal factors behind a decision.

Explanations must also inform clients of relevant recourse options, where appropriate.

Descriptions must be made available in plain language through the Algorithmic Impact
Assessment and discoverable via a departmental website.
Training

None
IT and business continuity management

None
Approval for the system to operate

None
Other requirements

The Directive on Automated Decision-Making also includes other requirements that must be met
for all impact levels.

Link to the Directive on Automated Decision-Making

Contact your institution's ATIP office to discuss the requirement for a Privacy Impact
Assessment as per the Directive on Privacy Impact Assessment.
Section 3: Questions and Answers
Section 3.1: Impact Questions and Answers
Reasons for Automation
1. What is motivating your team to introduce automation into this decision-making process?
(Check all that apply)
Improve overall quality of decisions
Use innovative approaches
The system is performing tasks that humans could not accomplish in a
reasonable period of time

2. What client needs will the system address and how will this system meet them? If possible,
describe how client needs have been identified.
The tool will provide CBSA Officers with additional information to help them
better identify non-compliant shipments and improve the Agency's
examination resultant rate.

3. Please describe any public benefits the system is expected to have.
By improving the quality of examination referrals, the tool will contribute to the
improved facilitation of low-risk shipments, i.e. fewer compliant export
shipments will be subject to examination. CBSA Officers will be able to focus
on shipments of higher risk.

4. How effective will the system likely be in meeting client needs?
Very effective                                                                                                               [ Points: +0 ]

5. Please describe any improvements, benefits, or advantages you expect from using an
automated system. This could include relevant program indicators and performance targets.
The tool provides additional information that is not currently available to CBSA
Officers in an easy to use interface. This will allow Officers to better identify
non-compliant or high-risk shipments. This will result in more examinations
resulting in enforcement actions or measures taken to correct exporter non-
compliance.

6. Please describe how you will ensure that the system is confined to addressing the client
needs identified above.
The tool is intended to provide additional information that will supplement
CBSA Officers' existing systems and database checks. This will be
communicated upon deployment in accompanying messaging and in an
information box within the tool. Additionally, only a small subset of relevant
export data is provided within the tool. Officers must access other key
shipment data within the primary Export operational systems in order to make
referrals or perform additional research.

7. Please describe any trade-offs between client interests and program objectives that you have
considered during the design of the project.
There are no trade-offs between client interests and program objectives. The
tool will assist CBSA Officers' decision-making to better identify potential non-
compliance. This will improve the facilitation of low-risk shipments.

8. Have alternative non-automated processes been considered?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

9. If non-automated processes were considered, why was automation identified as the preferred
option?
Regional staff have other manual processes they use that are less effective.
This is because the information is not available in any existing single
repository. The tool provides more information in an easy to use interface. It
allows for a more efficient decision-making process for CBSA Officers with
regard to the processing of export shipments. The Officers will still have the
ability to use existing manual processes.

10. What would be the consequence of not deploying the system?
Service delivery cannot achieve performance targets
Service quality is not as high

Risk Profile
11. Is the project within an area of intense public scrutiny (e.g. because of privacy concerns)
and/or frequent litigation?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

12. Are clients in this line of business particularly vulnerable?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

13. Are stakes of the decisions very high?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

14. Will this project have major impacts on staff, either in terms of their numbers or their roles?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

15. Will the use of the system create or exacerbate barriers for persons with disabilities?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

Project Authority
16. Will you require new policy authority for this project?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]
About the Algorithm
17. The algorithm used will be a (trade) secret
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

18. The algorithmic process will be difficult to interpret or to explain
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

About the Decision
19. Please describe the decision(s) that will be automated.
CBSA Officers can leverage the tool to supplement existing systems and
database checks to support informed decisions on whether to examine a
shipment they suspect contains non-compliant goods.

20. Does the decision pertain to any of the categories below (check all that apply):
Other (please specify)                                                                                                 [ Points: +1 ]

21. Please describe
 Border management: risk assessment and screening of export shipments.

Impact Assessment
22. Which of the following best describes the type of automation you are planning?
Partial automation (the system will contribute to administrative decision-
making by supporting an officer through assessments, recommendations,
intermediate decisions, or other outputs)                                                                  [ Points: +2 ]

23. Please describe the role of the system in the decision-making process.
When reviewing shipments for export, CBSA Officers refer to many sources to
gather information, including internal systems and databases, as well as
publicly available information on the internet. The tool can supplement the
Officers' existing systems and database checks by providing additional
information about potential risk in export shipments.

24. Will the system be making decisions or assessments that require judgement or discretion?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

25. Please describe the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to
process it.
This information is not shared for security reasons.

26. Please describe the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to
interpret it in the context of the administrative decision.
The tool outputs a list of export shipments with an associated risk probability
score, and also identifies when specific data points may be missing or
anomalous. The tool makes no decisions or recommendations. However,
CBSA officers may use it, in addition to existing databases and systems, to
make informed decisions on the appropriateness of examining shipments
that they suspect contain non-compliant goods.

27. Will the system perform an assessment or other operation that would not otherwise be
completed by a human?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

28. Is the system used by a different part of the organization than the ones who developed it?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

29. Are the impacts resulting from the decision reversible?
Reversible                                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

30. How long will impacts from the decision last?
Impacts are most likely to be brief                                                                             [ Points: +1 ]

31. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The tool will improve CBSA Officers' ability to identify potential non-
compliance and improve facilitation of compliant shipments. Impacts to
compliant exporters will be brief because any resulting examination after an
Officer's referral decision will usually occur the same day. Non-compliant
exporters will be processed in the regular manner, which could result in a
warning letter, a monetary penalty, enforcement action and/or possible
seizure of the goods. It is also possible for a referral for examination to be
cancelled by an Officer using existing system functionality, which will allow
the exporter to proceed with the export of the goods.

32. The impacts that the decision will have on the rights or freedoms of individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

33. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The tool supplements CBSA Officers' existing systems and database checks
related to export shipments. By assisting the Officer in making more precise
examination referrals, fewer compliant export shipments will be subject to
examination. As the tool contains only export shipment information, it has no
direct impacts on the rights or freedoms of individuals.

34. The impacts that the decision will have on the equality, dignity, privacy, and autonomy of
individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

35. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The inspection of export shipments does not affect the equality, dignity,
privacy nor the autonomy of individuals. The tool supplements the existing
systems and database checks currently being performed by CBSA Officers.
While the tool will improve the quality of examination referrals, it will not
impact the examination process.

36. The impacts that the decision will have on the health and well-being of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

37. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The inspection of export shipments does not affect the health or well-being of
individuals. The tool contains information related to export shipments only
and does not risk assess against individuals. The tool supplements existing
systems and database checks currently being performed by CBSA Officers.

38. The impacts that the decision will have on the economic interests of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

39. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
Any shipment of exported goods may be examined by the CBSA under Section
99(1)(c) of the Customs Act. Examinations may result in a fee to the exporter
to move their goods to the warehouse by the port terminal operator. This fee
is charged regardless of the outcome of the examination. Consequently, the
tool would not result in an economic impact to exporters unless there was an
increase in CBSA Officers at the Port to conduct more examinations, but this
would be unrelated to the implementation of the tool. The tool will provide
additional information that will support improved decision- making by CBSA
Officers. That is, the latter will be better able to determine which shipments to
examine. This will result in improved facilitation and less examinations for
low-risk shipments.

40. The impacts that the decision will have on the ongoing sustainability of an environmental
ecosystem, will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

41. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The tool does not have any environmental implications. The inspection of
shipments does not affect the ongoing sustainability of an environmental
ecosystem.

About the Data - A. Data Source
42. Will the Automated Decision System use personal information as input data?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

43. Have you verified that the use of personal information is limited to only what is directly
related to delivering a program or service?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

44. Is the personal information of individuals being used in a decision-making process that
directly affects those individuals?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

45. Have you verified if the system is using personal information in a way that is consistent
with: (a) the current Personal Information Banks (PIBs) and Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs)
of your programs or (b) planned or implemented modifications to the PIBs or PIAs that take new
uses and processes into account?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

46. Please list relevant PIB Bank Numbers.
CBSA PPU 1103
47. What is the highest security classification of the input data used by the system? (Select one)
Protected A                                                                                                                  [ Points: +1 ]

48. Who controls the data?
Federal government                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

49. Will the system use data from multiple different sources?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

50. Will the system require input data from an Internet- or telephony-connected device? (e.g.
Internet of Things, sensor)
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

51. Will the system interface with other IT systems?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

52. Who collected the data used for training the system?
Your institution                                                                                                            [ Points: +1 ]

53. Who collected the input data used by the system?
Your institution                                                                                                            [ Points: +1 ]

54. Please describe the input data collected and used by the system, its source, and method of
collection.
The data is initially collected in CERS where trade chain partners can submit
their export data via a portal or using the G7-EDI reporting method. The latter
allows exporters and customs service providers to submit export declarations
using electronic data interchange. Data is also collected in the System for
Export Examination (SEE) by Officers performing examinations. The tool does
not pull data directly from the operational channels, rather it is retrieved from
the Enterprise Data Warehouse. It uses a statistical model to evaluate export
shipment data received, including business number, container number(s), HS
code, commodity descriptors, country of destination, declared value, and
examination results data from SEE.

About the Data - B. Type of Data
55. Will the system require the analysis of unstructured data to render a recommendation or a
decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: 0 ]

56. What types of unstructured data? (Check all that apply)
Audio and text files                                                                                                      [ Points: +2 ]

Section 3.2: Mitigation Questions and Answers
Consultations
1. Internal Stakeholders (federal institutions, including the federal public service)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

2. Which Internal Stakeholders have you engaged?
Other (describe)
TBS Office of the Chief Information Officer
Communications services
Access to Information and Privacy Office
Program Policy

3. Please describe
CBSA Strategic Policy Branch, Chief Data Office
Regional end-users

4. External Stakeholders (groups in other sectors or jurisdictions)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

5. Which External Stakeholders have you engaged?
Other (describe)

6. Please describe
Organizations in other sectors or jurisdictions

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Data Quality
7. Do you have documented processes in place to test datasets against biases and other
unexpected outcomes? This could include experience in applying frameworks, methods,
guidelines or other assessment tools.
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

8. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

9. Have you developed a process to document how data quality issues were resolved during the
design process?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

10. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

11. Have you undertaken a Gender Based Analysis Plus of the data?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

12. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

13. Have you assigned accountability in your institution for the design, development,
maintenance, and improvement of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

14. Do you have a documented process to manage the risk that outdated or unreliable data is
used to make an automated decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

15. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

16. Is the data used for this system posted on the Open Government Portal?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Procedural
Fairness
17. Does the audit trail identify the authority or delegated authority identified in legislation?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

18. Does the system provide an audit trail that records all the recommendations or decisions
made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

19. Are all key decision points identifiable in the audit trail?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

20. Are all key decision points within the automated system's logic linked to the relevant
legislation, policy or procedures?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

21. Do you maintain a current and up to date log detailing all of the changes made to the model
and the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

22. Does the system's audit trail indicate all of the decision points made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

23. Can the audit trail generated by the system be used to help generate a notification of the
decision (including a statement of reasons or other notifications) where required?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

24. Does the audit trail identify precisely which version of the system was used for each
decision it supports?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

25. Does the audit trail show who an authorized decision-maker is?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

26. Is the system able to produce reasons for its decisions or recommendations when required?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

27. Is there a process in place to grant, monitor, and revoke access permission to the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

28. Is there a mechanism to capture feedback by users of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

29. Is there a recourse process established for clients that wish to challenge the decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

30. Does the system enable human override of system decisions?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]
31. Is there a process in place to log the instances when overrides were performed?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

32. Does the system's audit trail include change control processes to record modifications to the
system's operation or performance?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

33. Have you prepared a concept case to the Government of Canada Enterprise Architecture
Review Board?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Privacy
34. If your system uses or creates personal information, have you undertaken a Privacy Impact
Assessment, or updated an existing one?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

35. Have you undertaken other types of privacy assessments for your automation project?
Please describe any relevant efforts.
It has been determined that a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) is required for
this tool. The PIA will be written in combination with other functionality, as
part of the larger transformation to establish a risk assessment model in the
export stream. This will be done once the CBSA has determined which other
functionalities would be the most effective at detecting high-risk shipments.

36. Have you designed and built security and privacy into your systems from the concept stage
of the project?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

37. Is the information used within a closed system (i.e. no connections to the Internet, Intranet
or any other system)?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

38. If the sharing of personal information is involved, has an agreement or arrangement with
appropriate safeguards been established?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

39. Will you de-identify any personal information used or created by the system at any point in
the lifecycle?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]