Algorithmic Impact Assessment Results

Version: 0.10.0
Project Details
1. Name of Respondent
Sgt Tom Guineau

2. Job Title
Technical Manager

3. Department
Royal Canadian Mounted Police

4. Branch
NHQ/Tech Ops/SSIS/NCECC/Tech Unit

5. Project Title
Griffeye

6. Project ID from IT Plan
Griffeye CS and Di Pro

7. Departmental Program (from Department Results Framework)
Griffeye CS and Di Pro

8. Project Phase
Implementation                                                                                                           [ Points: 0 ]

9. Please provide a project description:
SOFTWARE already in Use - Tool designed to assist in the categorization/
classification of Child Exploitation images and Videos. It ingests media
derived from Seized Exhibits, Submissions from partners (NCMEC, CyberTip
and other Law Enforcement Agencies et al) and presents all of the media and
associated embedded meta data (EXIF etc) into a workspace where
Categories per Sec 163 of the Criminal Code can be applied, media can be
grouped together using various filters, and pre-categorization performed
against hash databases of known material. This tool does offer the ability to
use an AI implementation to evaluate images and videos and determine
whether Child Pornography is present by applying trained Classifiers to group
media together for human review. This AI function is also able to Face Match
(not Face Recognize) against other media contained within the workspace to
attempt to group individuals with similar characteristics together. The inbuilt
Face Matching feature can be used and does not reach out to other systems
in order to resolve a face to a specific identifiable individual. Once work is
complete, the Hashes and associated meta data can be exported to share out
to other compatible tools using the PVIC Format, and shared as appropriate/
authorized.

About The System
10. Please check which of the following capabilities apply to your system.
Image and object recognition: Analyzing very large data sets to automate the
recognition, classification, and context associated with an image or object.
Content generation: Analyzing large data sets to categorize, process, triage,
personalize, and serve specific content for specific contexts
Risk assessment: Analyzing very large data sets to identify patterns and
recommend courses of action and in some cases trigger specific actions

Section 1: Impact Level : 2

Current Score: 39

Raw Impact Score: 39

Mitigation Score: 16
Section 2: Requirements Specific to Impact Level 2
Peer review

Consult at least one of the following experts and publish the complete review or a plain language
summary of the findings on a Government of Canada website:

    qualified expert from a federal, provincial, territorial or municipal government institution
    qualified members of faculty of a post-secondary institution
    qualified researchers from a relevant non-governmental organization
   contracted third-party vendor with a relevant specialization
   a data and automation advisory board specified by Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat.

OR

Publish specifications of the automated decision system in a peer-reviewed journal. Where
access to the published review is restricted, ensure that a plain language summary of the
findings is openly available.
Gender-based Analysis Plus

Ensure that the Gender-based Analysis Plus addresses the following issues:

   impacts of the automation project (including the system, data and decision) on gender and/or
   other identity factors;
   planned or existing measures to address risks identified through the Gender-based Analysis
   Plus.
Notice

Plain language notice posted through all service delivery channels in use (Internet, in person,
mail or telephone).
Human-in-the-loop for decisions

Decisions may be rendered without direct human involvement.
Explanation

In addition to any applicable legal requirement, ensure that a meaningful explanation is provided
to the client with any decision that results in the denial of a benefit or service, or involves a
regulatory action. The explanation must inform the client in plain language of:

   the role of the system in the decision-making process;
   the training and client data, their source, and method of collection, as applicable;
   the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to process it;
   the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to interpret it in the
   context of the administrative decision; and
   a justification of the administrative decision, including the principal factors that led to it.

Explanations must also inform clients of relevant recourse options, where appropriate.

A general description of these elements must also be made available through the Algorithmic
Impact Assessment and discoverable via a departmental website.
Training

Documentation on the design and functionality of the system.
IT and business continuity management

None
Approval for the system to operate

None
Other requirements

The Directive on Automated Decision-Making also includes other requirements that must be met
for all impact levels.

Link to the Directive on Automated Decision-Making

Contact your institution's ATIP office to discuss the requirement for a Privacy Impact
Assessment as per the Directive on Privacy Impact Assessment.
Section 3: Questions and Answers
Section 3.1: Impact Questions and Answers
Reasons for Automation
1. What is motivating your team to introduce automation into this decision-making process?
(Check all that apply)
Improve overall quality of decisions
The system is performing tasks that humans could not accomplish in a
reasonable period of time
Use innovative approaches
Existing backlog of work or cases
Lower transaction costs of an existing program
Other (please specify)

2. Please describe
With respect to Child Pornography and sexual abuse videos and images,
human review and decision making is always required to quickly identify,
locate and safeguard children being victimized. With the average single case
containing in excess of 3 million media items to review, such tools are
employed in order to identify which media has been reviewed or investigated
previously, and then group 'new media' together for the human review and
more quickly determine police response/rescue. By removing the need to
review the exact same horrific media over and over again not only adds
efficiency to safeguarding children, it lends itself to protecting the
investigator's health and well-being through unnecessary exposure.

3. What client needs will the system address and how will this system meet them? If possible,
describe how client needs have been identified.
There are several clients involved; primarily the victimized and abused
children need to be identified, located and safeguarded from the abusive
situation regardless of location in the world as soon as possible. If the scant
law enforcement resources spend their time reviewing non-relevant or non-
urgent materials it would delay discovery of the abuse for months or years,
leaving the victim to be further abused despite the organization having timely
information to save them in hand. Such systems aid in prioritizing media for
human review in order to determine the likelihood of a child being currently at
risk.

4. Please describe any public benefits the system is expected to have.
Further to above, the public has an expectation that law enforcement will act
on information and safeguard people in a timely manner. If 911 call would
take weeks to garner a response, public safety would be in jeopardy as would
trust in the ability to provide security of the person. Such systems that aid in
organizing data in a manner in which vulnerable persons are more quickly
offered aid is a no-brainer.

5. How effective will the system likely be in meeting client needs?
Very effective                                                                                                               [ Points: +0 ]

6. Please describe any improvements, benefits, or advantages you expect from using an
automated system. This could include relevant program indicators and performance targets.
Griffeye Analyze is one of very few niche tools available that addresses
categorizing media related to Child Pornography investigations. The benefits
of using such tools are:
- more quickly identify, investigate and locate/safeguard children at risk
- ease of evidence and intelligence sharing with external and internal partners,
as these tools utilize a standardized format in order to export/import data
- reduces psychological injury and grief to investigators by reducing the
amount of trauma they are continuously exposed to
- ability to provide prosecutors with factual data as to the severity and scope
of media collections by offenders
- be able to provide statistical data to government to convey the scope of
abuse and the associate police response
7. Please describe how you will ensure that the system is confined to addressing the client
needs identified above.
Griffeye Analyze is designed for media categorization specifically for this
purpose ( as are other competitive niche solutions ), and as such is purpose
built with these needs in mind.

8. Please describe any trade-offs between client interests and program objectives that you have
considered during the design of the project.
None

9. Have alternative non-automated processes been considered?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

10. If non-automated processes were considered, why was automation identified as the
preferred option?
Historically, investigators would physically print off images of abuse
originating from floppy disk drives and other digital storage, which resulted in
few media items requiring human review and evaluation. With the advent of
mass digital storage and the availability of high speed internet, the production,
transmission and collection of videos and images are near instant and often
result in a single investigation containing on average in excess of 2-3 million
media items to be reviewed (numerous computers, cellphones, tablets and
other common devices with large storage and connectivity can be found in
everyone's residences). The need to human review and evaluate each video or
image cannot be sustained by one person if they were to review each abuse
image, each Windows logo or Amazon listing over and over again if they have
already been seen in the past. Without digital processing and analysis of
media that can identify previously seen content or the ability to group media
together with various commonalities (same camera, same computer user,
same website et al), an investigator would take a month just to evaluate and
risk assess one case, let alone all of the reports that are submitted on a daily
basis.

11. What would be the consequence of not deploying the system?
Service cannot be delivered in a timely or efficient manner                                     [ Points: +2 ]
Service costs are too high                                                                                          [ Points: 0 ]
Service quality is not as high                                                                                      [ Points: 0 ]
Service delivery cannot achieve performance targets                                              [ Points: 0 ]
Other (please specify)                                                                                                 [ Points: 0 ]

12. Please describe
Children will continue to be filmed while being sexually assaulted or tortured
due to delays in evaluating and prioritizing media under investigation.

Risk Profile
13. Is the project within an area of intense public scrutiny (e.g. because of privacy concerns)
and/or frequent litigation?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

14. Are clients in this line of business particularly vulnerable?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]
15. Are stakes of the decisions very high?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

16. Will this project have major impacts on staff, either in terms of their numbers or their roles?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

17. Will the use of the system create or exacerbate barriers for persons with disabilities?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

Project Authority
18. Will you require new policy authority for this project?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

About the Algorithm
19. The algorithm used will be a (trade) secret
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

20. The algorithmic process will be difficult to interpret or to explain
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

About the Decision
21. Please describe the decision(s) that will be automated.
The tool has the ability to group media together in a number of ways that are
not AI driven (group by exif, file path, binary hash matching et al) but can also
have the feature of leveraging additional modules of ML to group images/
videos together if they contain children, various sexual assault acts or levels
of nudity. The decisions are to group media together and flag them to the
investigator in order to prioritize their manual human review and evaluation -
so effectively, the final decision always resides with the person operating the
tool. The AI is to assist in more quickly locating media that contains elements
of children and sexual abuse among masses of unrelated media such as
internet web page media, operating system images and other more legitimate
media.

22. Does the decision pertain to any of the categories below (check all that apply):
Other (please specify)                                                                                                 [ Points: +1 ]

23. Please describe
The decisions more quickly identify Child Pornography media content within
mass digital storage, in order to prioritize their human review.

Impact Assessment
24. Which of the following best describes the type of automation you are planning?
Partial automation (the system will contribute to administrative decision-
making by supporting an officer through assessments, recommendations,
intermediate decisions, or other outputs)                                                                  [ Points: +2 ]

25. Please describe the role of the system in the decision-making process.
Please refer to previous information
26. Will the system be making decisions or assessments that require judgement or discretion?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

27. Please describe the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to
process it.
The system (when using any AI feature) attempts to examine the content of
images or videos to determine if certain visual or behavioral elements exist
within (ie - is there a child present? Is there an adult? is there a sexual act
occurring? is there genetalia present et al). Media containing selected
elements is flagged and brought to the operator's attention as the prudent
starting point to determine if Child Pornography is present within that set of
media items.

28. Please describe the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to
interpret it in the context of the administrative decision.
The output results in media being flagged as a priority for human review,
where an investigator can then watch the video or look at the image to
ascertain and confirm whether the content/context therein is Child
Pornography as defined by the Criminal Code, and thus decide if there is
current risk to a person/persons requiring immediate intervention

29. Will the system perform an assessment or other operation that would not otherwise be
completed by a human?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

30. Is the system used by a different part of the organization than the ones who developed it?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

31. Are the impacts resulting from the decision reversible?
Reversible                                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

32. How long will impacts from the decision last?
Impacts are most likely to be brief                                                                             [ Points: +1 ]

33. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The impact is that the AI is not the final decision as it rests with the human
operator. The AI functions as an aid and not an authoritative role within the
investigative process.

34. The impacts that the decision will have on the rights or freedoms of individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

35. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The AI functions as an aid and not an authoritative role within the investigative
process.

36. The impacts that the decision will have on the equality, dignity, privacy, and autonomy of
individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

37. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The AI functions as an aid and not an authoritative role within the investigative
process.

38. The impacts that the decision will have on the health and well-being of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

39. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The AI functions as an aid and not an authoritative role within the investigative
process. However, the use of the tool will reduce the time in safeguarding
children being sexually assaulted or tortured, which in turn is to the overall
benefit to the victim if rescue were to occur as sooner rather than later. As
well, a reduction in the repetitive traumatic exposure by investigators to such
media will benefit their well being.

40. The impacts that the decision will have on the economic interests of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

41. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The AI functions as an aid and not an authoritative role within the investigative
process.

42. The impacts that the decision will have on the ongoing sustainability of an environmental
ecosystem, will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

43. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The AI functions as an aid and not an authoritative role within the investigative
process.

About the Data - A. Data Source
44. Will the Automated Decision System use personal information as input data?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

45. What is the highest security classification of the input data used by the system? (Select one)
Protected B / Protected C                                                                                           [ Points: +3 ]

46. Who controls the data?
Federal government                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

47. Will the system use data from multiple different sources?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

48. Will the system require input data from an Internet- or telephony-connected device? (e.g.
Internet of Things, sensor)
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]
49. Will the system interface with other IT systems?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

50. Who collected the data used for training the system?
A foreign government or non-government third party                                               [ Points: +4 ]

51. Who collected the input data used by the system?
Your institution                                                                                                            [ Points: +1 ]

52. Please describe the input data collected and used by the system, its source, and method of
collection.
Input data (Images and Videos) consists of evidence submitted by Police,
NGOs and other industry as a function of reporting a criminal offence. It can
come by way of police seizure (Judicial Authorizations) or submitted via third
party (CyberTip, NCMEC, Industry Reporting). Some is collected forensically,
some electronically by the party that received it or as it traverses their IT
systems and flagged for reporting to police. Police agencies receive such
media either directly from victims/complainants or via assistance requests
from other LE agencies

About the Data - B. Type of Data
53. Will the system require the analysis of unstructured data to render a recommendation or a
decision?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: 0 ]

Section 3.2: Mitigation Questions and Answers
Consultations
1. Internal Stakeholders (federal institutions, including the federal public service)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

2. Which Internal Stakeholders have you engaged?
Strategic Policy and Planning
Data Governance
Legal Services
Access to Information and Privacy Office
Program Policy

3. External Stakeholders (groups in other sectors or jurisdictions)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

4. Which External Stakeholders have you engaged?
Academia
Industry
Governments in other Jurisdictions
International Organizations

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Data Quality
5. Do you have documented processes in place to test datasets against biases and other
unexpected outcomes? This could include experience in applying frameworks, methods,
guidelines or other assessment tools.
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

6. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

7. Have you developed a process to document how data quality issues were resolved during the
design process?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

8. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

9. Have you undertaken a Gender Based Analysis Plus of the data?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

10. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

11. Have you assigned accountability in your institution for the design, development,
maintenance, and improvement of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

12. Do you have a documented process to manage the risk that outdated or unreliable data is
used to make an automated decision?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

13. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

14. Is the data used for this system posted on the Open Government Portal?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Procedural
Fairness
15. Does the audit trail identify the authority or delegated authority identified in legislation?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

16. Does the system provide an audit trail that records all the recommendations or decisions
made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

17. Are all key decision points identifiable in the audit trail?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

18. Are all key decision points within the automated system's logic linked to the relevant
legislation, policy or procedures?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

19. Do you maintain a current and up to date log detailing all of the changes made to the model
and the system?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

20. Does the system's audit trail indicate all of the decision points made by the system?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

21. Can the audit trail generated by the system be used to help generate a notification of the
decision (including a statement of reasons or other notifications) where required?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

22. Does the audit trail identify precisely which version of the system was used for each
decision it supports?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

23. Does the audit trail show who an authorized decision-maker is?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

24. Is the system able to produce reasons for its decisions or recommendations when required?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

25. Is there a process in place to grant, monitor, and revoke access permission to the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

26. Is there a mechanism to capture feedback by users of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

27. Is there a recourse process established for clients that wish to challenge the decision?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

28. Does the system enable human override of system decisions?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

29. Is there a process in place to log the instances when overrides were performed?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

30. Does the system's audit trail include change control processes to record modifications to the
system's operation or performance?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

31. Have you prepared a concept case to the Government of Canada Enterprise Architecture
Review Board?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Privacy
32. If your system uses or creates personal information, have you undertaken a Privacy Impact
Assessment, or updated an existing one?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

33. Please indicate the following in your answer: Title and scope of the Privacy Impact
Assessment; How the automation project fits into the program; and Date of Privacy Impact
Assessment completion or modification.
PIA is collateral to FVEYE Hash Sharing Agreement reviewed by RCMP Legal,
ATIP, DSB, LSU and other internal stakeholders which defines personal
information as it pertains to this data type. Documentation regarding the use
of hashes and derivative meta data have been produced for collateral issues
and can be provided upon request.

34. Have you designed and built security and privacy into your systems from the concept stage
of the project?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

35. Is the information used within a closed system (i.e. no connections to the Internet, Intranet
or any other system)?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

36. If the sharing of personal information is involved, has an agreement or arrangement with
appropriate safeguards been established?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

37. Will you de-identify any personal information used or created by the system at any point in
the lifecycle?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]