Algorithmic Impact Assessment Results
Version: 1.0.1
Section 1: Impact Level : 2
Current Score: 56
Raw Impact Score: 56
Mitigation Score: 56
Section 2: Requirements Speciﬁc to Impact Level 2
Notice
Plain language notice posted through all service delivery channels in use (Internet, in
person, mail or telephone).
Explanation
The explanation from level I is published.
In addition, a more detailed, meaningful, plain language, explanation is provided to the
client with any decision that results in the denial of a beneﬁt or service, or involves a
regulatory action.
This explanation must inform the client of the reason or justiﬁcation of the administrative
decision. This involves a clear and client-focused description of how the automated
decision system came to the output it did, including:

   •  the principal factors that led to it, such as, where appropriate, a description of the
       decision tree, scoring or weights of certain factors, and

   •  how the automated decision system output was used by human officers
The client must also be provided with the link to the published level I explanation.
Peer review
Consult at least one of the following qualiﬁed experts and publish the complete review or a
plain language summary on a Government of Canada website:

   •  Experts from a federal, provincial, territorial or municipal government institution

   •  Faculty members of a post-secondary institution


                                                                 Page 1 of 32
   •  Researchers from a relevant non-governmental organization

   •  Contracted third-party vendor with a relevant specialization

   •  A data and automation advisory board speciﬁed by Treasury Board of Canada
       Secretariat
Gender-based Analysis Plus
Ensure that the Gender-based Analysis Plus has been consulted with your department's
diversity and inclusion experts and includes:

   •  An assessment of how the automation project might impact different population
      groups. This includes consideration of the impacts of the automated decision
      system and data used in the project, as well as the likely impact of the ﬁnal
       decision. Where possible, cite the data used to assess the impacts. It is
     recommended that the data be gender-disaggregated and include other
       intersecting identity factors such as age, disability and race. If the data is
       unavailable, identify where the data gaps exist

   •  Details of planned or existing measures to address risks identiﬁed through the
      Gender-based Analysis Plus or other assessments
Training
Role-based training on how to appropriately use and explain the functionalities of the
automated decision system, at a high level.
Ensuring human involvement
The system may make decisions and assessments without direct human involvement.
Humans are to be involved in system quality assurance and can intervene in the making of
decisions by the system where appropriate.
Approval for the system to operate
Assistant deputy minister responsible for the program.
Other requirements
The Directive on Automated Decision-Making also includes other requirements that must
be met for all impact levels.
Link to the Directive on Automated Decision-Making
Contact your institution's ATIP office to discuss the requirement for a Privacy Impact
Assessment as per the Directive on Privacy Impact Assessment.


                                                                 Page 2 of 32
Section 3: Questions and Answers
Section 3.1: Project Details
1. Published AIA version number
1.0
2. Name of Respondent
Shawn MacDougall
3. Job Title
Senior Director, Disability Beneﬁts Program Management
4. Name of ADM responsible for the program using the automated decision system
Steven Harris
5. Department
Veterans Affairs (Department of)
6. Branch
Service Delivery Branch
7. Teams consulted on completion of the Algorithmic Impact Assessment
Veterans Affairs Canada AI and Automation Development Team, Enterprise Architecture
Team, Disability Beneﬁts Program Management, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
Privacy and Responsible Data Division, Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada,
Justice Canada
8. Project Title
Claim Summary Tool
9. Project ID from IT Plan
PRJ-00013860
10. Service ID
1257
11. Departmental Program (from Departmental Results Framework)
Disability Beneﬁts
12. Project Phase
Implementation [ Points: 0 ]

                                                                 Page 3 of 32
13. Provide a project description:
Veterans Affairs Canada is introducing a new artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) Claim Summary Tool
(CST) to assist decision makers by reviewing and organizing the large volumes of
documentation associated with Disability Beneﬁt applications.
Processing Disability Beneﬁt applications, such as Disability Pension and Pain and
Suffering Compensation, is a time-consuming process. The average application, including
supporting documentation such as military records, contains over 800 pages. Veterans
Affairs decision makers review these documents to identify facts related to the claimed
condition. Demand for Disability Beneﬁts has increased signiﬁcantly, with application
volumes rising by 122% over the past decade. Increased volumes and more complex cases
have slowed processing times.
To deliver faster service for Veterans and their families, Veterans Affairs Canada developed
the CST. The CST uses AI to scan application documents, organize content, and highlight
key details so decision makers can locate relevant information more quickly. Each
summary includes direct links to the source documentation to support transparency and
accuracy, and all scanned documentation remains fully searchable by the decision maker.
When the summary provides enough information for a favourable decision, the decision
maker can proceed more quickly. If the summary does not provide enough information for
a favourable decision, the decision maker will review the entire ﬁle manually before
ﬁnalizing the decision. This approach ensures AI is used to speed up processing without
negatively impacting the quality of decisions Veterans receive.
The CST does not make decisions. Every decision is made by trained VAC decision makers
in accordance with legislation, regulations, and policy. The CST provides a structured
summary of evidence and links each element back to the original document for easy
veriﬁcation.
Learn more about Artiﬁcial intelligence at Veterans Affairs Canada.
(Full URL: https://veterans.gc.ca/en/about-vac/our-values/transparency/artiﬁcial-
intelligence-veterans-affairs-canada )





                                                                 Page 4 of 32
Section 3.2: Impact Questions and Answers
Reasons for Automation
1. What is motivating your team to introduce automation into this decision-making
process?
(Check all that apply)

   •  Improve overall quality of decisions

   •  Perform tasks that humans could not accomplish in a reasonable period of

   •  time

   •  Reduce existing backlog of work or cases

   •  Use innovative approaches

   •  Other (specify)
2. Please describe (other)
The primary barrier to timely Disability Beneﬁt decisions is the large volume of
documentation that must be reviewed. The average application, including supporting
documentation such as military records, contains over 800 pages. Veterans Affairs
decision makers review these documents to identify facts related to the claimed condition.
As a result, decision makers currently spend signiﬁcant time manually reviewing ﬁles to
locate information related to the claimed condition, such as injury dates or diagnosis
conﬁrmations, before they can begin to make their decision.
The CST is being implemented to address this challenge. The CST scans the application
and supporting documents and assembles the relevant evidence into a structured,
traceable and accurate summary for the decision maker. By automating the most
repetitive and time-intensive aspects of document review, the CST reduces administrative
workload and will help improve turnaround times and service to Veterans without
compromising quality.
3. What are the client needs the system will address? Describe how client needs have
been identiﬁed.
Clients and client advocacy groups have consistently emphasized the importance of the
Disability Beneﬁt application process meeting the Departmental service standard. Delays
in processing can limit Veterans’ timely access to ﬁnancial support, health services, and
other beneﬁts that may be critical to their well-being. The CST supports improved
timeliness by automating the initial review of applications and supporting documentation,
allowing relevant information to be identiﬁed more quickly for the decision maker.



                                                                 Page 5 of 32
4. Describe any positive impacts on clients and Canadian society that the system is
expected to have.
The CST is expected to have positive impacts on Veterans by reducing the time required to
process Disability Beneﬁt applications. By reducing manual document review, the CST
supports more efficient decision making and enables Veterans Affairs Canada to meet
service standards more consistently. Timelier decisions can reduce wait times and
uncertainty for Veterans, supporting earlier access to beneﬁts that may contribute to their
health, ﬁnancial stability, and overall well-being.
More broadly, improved Disability Beneﬁts application processing supports a responsive
and sustainable public service, strengthens conﬁdence in government programs, and
helps ensure public resources are used effectively.
5. How effective will the system likely be in meeting client needs?
Very effective [ Points: +0 ]
6. Describe why effectiveness is as selected.
The CST is expected to be very effective in meeting client needs by scanning applications
and supporting documentation and highlighting, assembling, and presenting relevant
evidence in a clear, structured, and traceable format for the decision maker. Each
summary will include links to the source documentation to support transparency and
accuracy, and all of the supporting documentation that was scanned by the CST will
remain searchable by the decision maker. If the summary does not contain sufficient
information for a favourable decision, the decision maker will conduct a comprehensive
manual review of the entire ﬁle to ensure no critical information is overlooked before
making a decision.
Testing indicates that the CST can reduce the number of pages requiring review by more
than 90% and reduce the average time required to review an application and supporting
documentation by approximately 50%. The CST will, therefore, assist decision makers in
meeting the service standard and will reduce turn-around times while maintaining decision
quality.
7. Describe how you will ensure that the system is conﬁned to addressing the client
needs identiﬁed.
The CST is designed to condense large volumes of material, including the application and
supporting documentation, into concise, structured summaries that highlight information
relevant to the claimed condition in Disability Beneﬁt applications. The CST does not make
decisions. Veterans Affairs Canada has implemented several controls to ensure the CST
remains conﬁned to this deﬁned purpose and continues to align with the client needs
identiﬁed:

   •  Clear and Limited Functionality: The CST is restricted to extracting, organizing, and
       presenting factual information from the application and supporting documentation.

                                                                 Page 6 of 32
   •  Testing, Validation, and Performance Monitoring: Controlled testing, including
       double-adjudication of test cases, veriﬁes that summaries are accurate, reliable,
     and consistent. Performance metrics such as time savings and reduction in
       administrative review burden are monitored to ensure the CST is delivering
       efficiency improvements without any expansion of scope.

   •  Mandatory Human Oversight: Decision makers review all CST outputs, validate the
      evidence presented, and retain full responsibility for determining eligibility. If the
     summary produced by the CST enables a decision maker to reach a favourable
       decision, the ﬁle can be processed faster (i.e., without a full manual review of all
      documents). If the ﬁle is not approved based on a review of the summary, the
       decision maker will review the entire ﬁle manually before ﬁnalizing the decision.

   •  Feedback and Continuous Improvement: User feedback and quality assessments
      inform reﬁnements to the summarization process. Enhancements focus solely on
      improving accuracy, clarity, and usability.
8. Describe any trade-offs between client interests and program objectives that you
have considered during the design of the project.
The introduction of the CST requires balancing the program objectives of improving
efficiency and reducing processing times with protecting client interests and maintaining
trust in the Disability Beneﬁt adjudication process. While the CST offers signiﬁcant
administrative beneﬁts, there are several potential trade-offs that must be carefully
managed.
One key consideration relates to decision quality and client conﬁdence. There is a risk that
automated summaries may omit or insufficiently describe relevant information, and some
clients or stakeholders may have concerns about the use of AI in the adjudication process.
To address these risks, Veterans Affairs Canada has implemented multiple safeguards.

   •   All summaries must be veriﬁed by a human decision-maker,

   •  Supporting source documents must be reviewed prior to rendering any decision,

   •  Summaries include direct links to source documentation to support transparency
     and accuracy, and

   •  When a summary does not contain sufficient information to support a favourable
       decision, the decision maker must conduct a comprehensive manual review of the
         full ﬁle.
These measures ensure that efficiency gains do not compromise accuracy, fairness, or
trust in the adjudication process.
A further consideration relates to privacy and security. To protect client information, the
Department conducted rigorous compliance reviews and ensured full adherence to

                                                                 Page 7 of 32
Government of Canada privacy, security, and responsible AI standards before
implementation.
9. Describe any improvements, beneﬁts, or advantages your department expects from
using an automated system.
VAC’s service standard for Disability Beneﬁts requires that 80% of decisions be rendered
within 16 weeks. In ﬁscal year 2024–2025, compliance with this standard declined from
69% to 47% due to increased program demand. While VAC improved internal efficiency,
application intake exceeded internal efficiency gains. With modernization initiatives,
including the implementation of the CST, VAC will be better positioned to meet service
standards and manage growing intake volumes.
Testing indicates that the CST can reduce the number of pages requiring review by more
than 90% and reduce the average time required to review an application and supporting
documentation by approximately 50%. The CST will, therefore, assist decision makers in
meeting the service standard by improving efficiency, reducing turn-around times and
maintaining decision quality.
10. What are your current program indicators, service standards or performance
targets?
The current service standard for the Disability Beneﬁt program is that 80% of Disability
Beneﬁt decisions must be made within 16 weeks for ﬁrst applications.
11. What is your current performance level against these indicators, standards or
targets?
The performance level for the 2024-2025 ﬁscal year was 47%.
12. How do you expect the system will change performance against your program
indicators, service standards or performance targets?
The Department expects that the CST will reduce average processing times for Disability
Beneﬁt applications by automating labour-intensive document review. While it is difficult
to precisely forecast the CST’s impact on overall service standard results given that
application volumes are driven by factors outside the Department’s control, the
productivity gains are expected to increase processing capacity. This will support Veterans
Affairs Canada in meeting service standards and managing growing intake volumes.
13. Have alternative non-automated processes been considered?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
14. If non-automated processes were considered, why was automation identiﬁed as
the preferred option?
Partial automation was selected as the preferred option because Disability Beneﬁt
decisions require the review of large volumes of documentation and have direct impacts
on Veterans’ ﬁnancial security, access to health services, and overall well-being. The

                                                                 Page 8 of 32
average application, including supporting documentation such as military records,
contains over 800 pages that a VAC decision maker reviews before making a decision. Fully
automating the decision making process would not be appropriate given the need for
human judgment, contextual understanding, and accountability in each case. In addition,
there is no legal authority under the Pension Act or the Veterans
Well-being Act for the Department to use an electronic system, including an automated
system, to make a decision or determination without human intervention.
Partial automation enables Veterans Affairs Canada to apply automation in a
proportionate manner by supporting administrative tasks such as scanning, identifying,
and organizing relevant information while maintaining human oversight and decision
making authority at all stages. Trained VAC decision makers remain responsible for
reviewing the evidence, applying legislation and policy, exercising professional judgment,
and making the ﬁnal decision on each application. This approach improves efficiency and
timeliness while ensuring transparency, fairness, and accountability in decisions that
directly affect Veterans.
15. What would be the consequence of not deploying the system?

   •  Service quality is not as high

   •  Service delivery cannot achieve performance targets

   •  Service cannot be delivered in a timely or efficient manner
Risk Proﬁle
16. Is the project within an area of intense public scrutiny (for example, because of
privacy concerns) and/or frequent litigation?
Yes [ Points: +3 ]
17. Does the line of business serve equity denied groups?
Yes [ Points: +3 ]
18. Indicate which equity denied groups are served and describe your mitigation
strategies to prevent adverse impacts for these groups.
Through the application of Gender-Based Analysis Plus (GBA+), Veterans Affairs Canada
considered potential impacts on equity-denied groups, including women, Indigenous
Peoples, persons with disabilities, members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, and visible
minorities. The CST is designed to support administrative efficiency by summarizing
application materials and does not differentiate treatment based on personal
characteristics. It does not automate decisions, and all determinations remain fully
human-driven.



                                                                 Page 9 of 32
Decision makers are required to verify summaries against source documents and apply
legislation and policy consistently, which mitigates the risk of adverse or inequitable
outcomes.
The primary population served by the CST is Canadian Armed Forces Veterans applying for
Disability Beneﬁts due to physical or mental health conditions. This population includes a
signiﬁcant proportion of equity-denied groups, including persons with disabilities, women,
Indigenous Veterans, 2SLGBTQI+ Veterans, and visible minorities. In particular, Indigenous
and 2SLGBTQI+ persons are overrepresented in the Veteran population vis-à-vis the
Canadian general population, according to Census 2021 and Canadian Veteran Health
Survey 2022 ﬁgures. Similarly, disabled Veterans are signiﬁcantly overrepresented relative
to the Canadian general population in all age groups analyzed by Statistics Canada (i.e., 17
to 44, 45 to 64, and 65+) in the Canadian Survey of Disability 2022. By reducing the time
required to process Disability Beneﬁt applications, the tool supports more timely access to
ﬁnancial support, health services, and other beneﬁts for all Veterans, including equity-
denied groups.
In addition, improved workload management and processing efficiency are expected to
support more consistent achievement of service standards and reduce application
backlogs. The use of modernized tools such as the CST also enhances the Department’s
ability to monitor service delivery using administrative and demographic data, including
GBA+-informed analysis. Over time, these improvements support equitable access to
beneﬁts and services, particularly for equity-denied Veteran populations whose
representation within the Canadian Armed Forces has increased and is expected to
continue to increase into the future.
19. Are there any population groups that the automated decision system should not
be applied to?
No [ Points: +0 ]
20. Has the system been assessed to understand whether it would create or
exacerbate barriers for persons with disabilities, and are measures in place to
address any identiﬁed issues?
Assessment has been conducted, and no barriers were identiﬁed. [ Points: +0 ]
21. Could the automated decision-system be at heightened risk of being an
exploitation target for malicious actors (for example, fraud for ﬁnancial gain)?
No [ Points: +0 ]
22. Have potential issues or harms with the existing service delivery approach been
raised by clients or their representatives, the media, audits or parliamentary
committees?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]


                                                                Page 10 of 32
23. Indicate the issue or harm, the group that raised them, and how these have been
addressed.
The current manual service delivery approach for reviewing documentation related to
Disability Beneﬁt applications has been the subject of sustained criticism from Veterans,
their representatives, Veterans’ advocacy organizations, the media, and Parliamentary
committees. These groups have consistently raised concerns about the signiﬁcant harms
associated with the existing process, including excessive wait times for Disability Beneﬁt
decisions that often far exceed established service standards, and a persistent and
growing backlog which has created delays that affect Veterans’ well-being by impacting
their access to ﬁnancial support and health services.
The Department is implementing the CST to reduce labour intensive document review and
improve overall efficiency. This approach is expected to reduce processing times and help
Veterans Affairs Canada meet its service standard of rendering 80% of ﬁrst applications
within 16 weeks without compromising quality.
24. Have you submitted a concept case to TBS and presented the project to the
Government of Canada Enterprise Architecture Review Board?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
Project Authority
25. Will you require new policy or legal authority for this project?
No [ Points: +0 ]
26. Indicate why you have chosen the response.
The Department of Veterans Affairs does not require new policy or legal authority to
implement the CST because the CST does not alter Disability Beneﬁt eligibility rules,
decision making authority, adjudication procedures, Veterans’ rights, or recourse
mechanisms.
About The System
27. Check which of the following capabilities apply to your system.
Text and speech analysis: Analyzing large data sets to recognize, process, and categorize
text, speech and voice, and make recommendations based on the categorization
Process optimization and workﬂow automation: Analyzing large data sets to identify any
anomalies, cluster patterns, predict outcomes or ways to optimize; and automate speciﬁc
workﬂows
Content generation: Analyzing large data sets to categorize, process, triage, personalize,
and serve speciﬁc content for speciﬁc contexts



                                                                Page 11 of 32
Image and object recognition: Analyzing large data sets to automate the recognition,
classiﬁcation, and context associated with an image or object
28. Who developed the system?
Your institution [ Points: +0 ]
29. Who conﬁgured the system?
Your institution [ Points: +0 ]
30. Is the system:
Custom built [ Points: +1 ]
31. Have you assigned accountability in your institution for the design, development,
and maintenance, of the system?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
32. Is there a group in your institution responsible for identifying and implementing
opportunities for improvement?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
33. Does your system conform with the appropriate clauses of standard CAN/ASC EN
301549:2024, Accessibility requirements for Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) products and services?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
34. Is a non-automated alternative planned and available in the event the automated
decision system was unavailable for an extended period of time?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
35. Is there a process in place to grant, monitor, and revoke access permission to the
system?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
36. The impacts that the development, operation, and maintenance of the system
could have on the ongoing sustainability of an environmental ecosystem, may be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]
37. Describe why the impacts resulting from the system's development, operations
and maintenance are as selected.
The CST will have little or no impact on the environmental ecosystem because it is used to
scan Disability Beneﬁt applications and supporting documentation, and to assemble
relevant evidence into a structured, traceable, and accurate summary for the decision
maker.

                                                                Page 12 of 32
About the Algorithm
38. The algorithm used will be a (trade) secret
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
39. The algorithmic process will be difficult to interpret or to explain
No [ Points: +0 ]
40. Is the algorithm (Check all that apply):
Based on patterns in data identiﬁed by the AI model (for example, neural network, deep
learning) [ Points: +1 ]
41. If the automated decision-system is model based, is the model inference (select
all that apply):
Probabilistic (infer several models to explain data) [ Points: +1 ]
42. Is the model:
Generative (for example, linear discriminant analysis, naïve Bayes) [ Points: +1 ]
43. Describe the model being used.
The CST leverages a "Retrieval-Augmented Generation" architecture hosted entirely within
VAC’s secure Microsoft Azure cloud environment. The system operates in four distinct
stages:
1.  Ingestion & Handwriting Recognition (OCR)
    1.1. The system ﬁrst retrieves Service Health Records and application documents from
      VAC’s Digital Image (DIGIMG) repository. It utilizes Azure AI Document Intelligence
        to separate documents into individual pages and extract machine readable text.
        This model is capable of recognizing and digitizing handwritten content, as well as
        identifying structural elements like forms, tables, and headings.
2. Information Retrieval (The "Search" Layer)
    2.1. The processed text and metadata are temporarily indexed in an Azure AI Search
        index. When a speciﬁc medical diagnosis and associated medical code is
       provided, the system queries this index to retrieve only the speciﬁc pages and
       paragraphs relevant to that condition. This ensures the AI focuses exclusively on
       the client's existing records.
3. Generative Summarization (The LLM) The retrieved content is passed as context to the
   Azure OpenAI service (currently utilizing the GPT-5 model).
    3.1. Function: The model identiﬁes, organizes, and summarizes the evidence related to
       the claimed condition.


                                                                Page 13 of 32
    3.2. Constraint: The model operates under strict instructions to summarize only; it does
       not apply eligibility rules, or assign outcomes.
    3.3. Traceability: The ﬁnal output includes hyperlinks connecting every summarized
       point directly back to the source page in the original ﬁle.
4. Data Lifecycle & Security
    4.1. Zero Retention: Once the summary is generated, all temporary AI processing data,
       including the vectorized document content and the Search index, is deleted.
    4.2. Storage: The ﬁnal summary is saved as a PDF in the DIGIMG repository and the
        client’s electronic case ﬁle.
    4.3. Governance: No external partners are involved in the model's operation, and
       Service Health Records (including those from DND) are accessed solely through
      VAC's authorized repositories.
The CST does not make decisions.
49. Describe why you have not evaluated whether variables could be proxies for
protected characteristics.
It was chosen based on cost considerations, inclusion of health information and testing
results.
45. Will the algorithm continue to learn and evolve as it is used?
No [ Points: +0 ]
46. Does the algorithm consider protected characteristics to make its decisions or
recommendations?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
47. Describe why protected characteristics are being considered and any mitigations
in place to address potential issues with bias or discrimination.
Personal characteristics such as disability, age, and gender are essential pieces of
information in the Disability Beneﬁt adjudication process. These factors directly inﬂuence
eligibility, entitlement, and assessment under the governing legislation and policies.
Because they are integral to understanding the nature of the claim, the CST must process
and reﬂect this information when generating a summary of the documents relevant to the
application.
48. Have you evaluated whether variables that the system bases its decisions or
recommendations on could be proxies for protected characteristics?
No [ Points: +2 ]

                                                                Page 14 of 32
49. Describe why you have not evaluated whether variables could be proxies for
protected characteristics.
The Department has not evaluated whether any variables could act as proxies for
protected characteristics because these characteristics are already explicitly included in
the information that must be reviewed as part of the Disability Beneﬁt adjudication
process. Since protected characteristics must be considered directly and cannot be
replaced or inferred through proxies when summarizing information contained in Service
Health Records and other documentation, a proxy analysis would not be meaningful or
applicable in this context.
About the Decision
50. Describe the administrative decision(s) that is being supported or made by the
algorithm.
When Veterans Affairs Canada receives a Disability Beneﬁt application, the application is
registered in departmental systems and supporting service and medical records are
gathered from multiple sources. Once the ﬁle is complete, it is assigned to a trained
decision maker, who reviews extensive documentation to identify information relevant to
the claimed condition. The decision maker considers evidence such as service health
records, medical diagnoses, injury or onset dates, continuity of symptoms, and other
relevant facts in order to determine entitlement and, where applicable, assess the level of
beneﬁt in accordance with legislation, regulations, and policy.
The CST does not change these steps or make entitlement decisions. Instead, it supports
the document review stage by scanning, organizing, and summarizing large volumes of
documentation to help decision makers identify relevant evidence more efficiently. Human
decision makers continue to review the complete record, apply legislation and policy,
exercise professional judgment, and make the ﬁnal decision in all cases.
51. Does the decision pertain to any of the categories below (check all that apply).
Note that the examples in brackets are not exhaustive.
Social assistance (employment insurance, disability or housing beneﬁts, children or
seniors programs) [ Points: +1 ]
Impact Assessment
52. Which of the following best describes the type of automation you are planning?
Partial automation (the system will contribute to administrative decision making by
supporting an officer with assessments, recommendations, intermediate decisions, or
other outputs) [ Points: +2 ]
53. Describe the role of the system in the decision-making process.
The primary challenge in Disability Beneﬁt decision making is the volume of
documentation that must be reviewed. The average application, including supporting

                                                                Page 15 of 32
documentation such as military records, contains more than 800 pages that are reviewed
to identify facts related to the claimed condition for consideration by the decision maker
before a determination is made.
The CST supports this stage of the process by scanning, organizing, and summarizing large
volumes of application materials and supporting documentation. The system highlights
and assembles relevant evidence into a structured, traceable and accurate summary for
the decision maker. Each summary includes links to the original source documents, and
all scanned documentation remains fully searchable, supporting transparency and
veriﬁcation.
The CST does not change the Disability Beneﬁt adjudication process and does not make
decisions. If a summary does not contain sufficient information to support a favourable
decision, the decision maker conducts a comprehensive review of the full record to ensure
no critical information is overlooked. In all cases, trained VAC decision makers review the
complete evidence, apply legislation and policy, exercise professional judgment, and
make the ﬁnal decision.
By supporting the document review and information identiﬁcation stages of the process,
the CST assists decision makers in working more efficiently and helps Veterans Affairs
Canada meet service standards and reduce turnaround times, without compromising
decision quality or accountability.
54. Will the system be making decisions or assessments that require judgment or
discretion?
No [ Points: +0 ]
55. Describe.
The CST does not make Disability Beneﬁt decisions or perform assessments requiring
judgment or discretion. There is no legal authority under the Pension Act or the Veterans
Well-being Act for an electronic system, including an automated system, to make a
decision or determination without human intervention. All Disability Beneﬁt decisions
therefore remain the responsibility of VAC decision makers.
56. Will this project have major impacts on staff, either in terms of their numbers or
their roles?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
57. Describe the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to
process it.

   •  Training of model / prompt engineering

   •  Bias detection

   •  Testing data and test cases with SMEs

                                                                Page 16 of 32
   •  Speciﬁc LLM

   •  User feedback
58. Describe the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed
to interpret it in the context of the administrative decision.
The CST produces a summary that is a subset of a larger set of documents that is being
reviewed including the Disability Beneﬁt application, Service Health Records and medical
Questionnaires. The CST scans the application and supporting documentation, and then
highlights, assembles and presents the relevant evidence in a clear, structured, and
traceable format to the decision maker. Each summary includes links to the source
documentation to support transparency and accuracy, and all of the supporting
documentation that was scanned by the CST remains searchable by the decision maker. If
the summary does not contain sufficient information for a favourable decision, the
decision maker will conduct a comprehensive review of the entire ﬁle before making a
decision to ensure no critical information is overlooked.
The CST does not make Disability Beneﬁt decisions or determine Disability Beneﬁt
eligibility. Every Disability Beneﬁt decision will continue to be made by Veterans Affairs
Canada decision makers who will verify the facts, conﬁrm policy application, and ﬁnalize
the decision.
59. Will the system perform an assessment or other operation that is not currently
completed by a human?
No [ Points: +0 ]
60. Is the system used by a different part of the organization than the ones who
developed it?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
61. Are the impacts resulting from the decision reversible?
Reversible [ Points: +1 ]
62. How long could impacts from the decision last?
Impacts are most likely to be brief [ Points: +1 ]
63. Describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as selected, including
potential risks identiﬁed and mitigations in place.
The CST provides partial automation limited to administrative tasks, speciﬁcally,
extracting, organizing, and summarizing information from Disability Beneﬁt applications
and supporting documentation for decision makers. All Disability Beneﬁt decisions remain
fully human-made. Decision makers retain complete authority, accountability, and
discretion over every determination.


                                                                Page 17 of 32
The summary produced by the CST is reviewed by the decision maker. Each summary
includes hyperlinks to the original source documents to enable veriﬁcation. If the summary
does not provide sufficient information, the decision maker will conduct a comprehensive
manual review of the full ﬁle before making a determination.
64. The impacts that the decision could have on the rights or freedoms of individuals
may be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]
65. Describe how this impact level was determined. Include which human rights
frameworks were assessed, potential risk that were identiﬁed and mitigations put in
place.
The CST has little or no impact on the rights or freedoms of individuals. The system
provides partial automation limited to administrative tasks, speciﬁcally, extracting,
organizing, and summarizing information from Disability Beneﬁt applications and
supporting documentation for decision makers.
All Disability Beneﬁt decisions remain fully human-made. Decision makers retain
complete authority, accountability, and discretion over every determination. They may
consult the summary for efficiency, but they continue to have full access to the complete
record reviewed by the Claim Summary Tool and can independently verify all facts and
evidence.
66. The impacts that the decision could have on the equality, dignity, privacy, and
autonomy of individuals may be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]
67. Describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as selected, including
potential risks identiﬁed and mitigations in place.
The CST has little to no impact on the equality, dignity, privacy, or autonomy of individuals.
It performs limited administrative automation by organizing and summarizing information
from Disability Beneﬁt applications and supporting documents and does not make
decisions or replace the judgment of Veterans Affairs Canada decision makers.
All decisions remain fully human-made. Decision makers retain full access to all source
documents, can independently verify all information, and exercise full discretion. Personal
information is used solely for the administration of Disability Beneﬁt applications and is
handled in accordance with the Privacy Act, the Pension Act, the Veterans Well-being Act
and departmental privacy requirements.
68. The impacts that the decision could have on the health and well-being of
individuals may be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]


                                                                Page 18 of 32
69. Describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as selected, including
potential risks identiﬁed and mitigations in place.
The CST is expected to have little or no impact on the health and well-being of individuals.
The CST does not make Disability Beneﬁt decisions, and all decisions remain the
responsibility of Veterans Affairs Canada decision makers, who retain full authority and
discretion.
The summary produced by the CST is reviewed by the decision maker and is used only
when it supports a favourable outcome. Each summary includes hyperlinks to the original
source documents to enable veriﬁcation. If the summary does not provide sufficient
information, the decision maker will conduct a comprehensive manual review of the full
ﬁle before making a determination.
70. The impacts that the decision could have on the economic interests of individuals
may be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]
71. Describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as selected, including
potential risks identiﬁed and mitigations in place.
The CST has little or no impact on the economic interests of individuals. Although Disability
Beneﬁts are monetary in nature, the CST does not make decisions, determine eligibility, or
replace human judgement. All Disability Beneﬁt decisions remain fully under the authority
of Veterans Affairs Canada decision makers.
72. The impacts that the decision could have on the ongoing sustainability of an
environmental ecosystem, may be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]
73. Describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as selected, including
potential risks identiﬁed and mitigations in place.
The CST will have little or no impact on the ongoing sustainability of an environmental
ecosystem because it is purely a digital administrative tool.
74. Have you assessed system performance for clients with a range of personal and
intersectional identity factors (for example, gender, age, race, language, ethnicity,
disability) to verify that decisions and outcomes are fair for a diverse group of people,
and have the identiﬁed disparities been addressed?
Assessment conducted; no performance differences identiﬁed. [ Points: +0 ]
75. Describe your approach to assessing system performance.
Through several iterations of testing, Veterans Affairs Canada used a subset of claims
(conditions) with representations of gender, age and language that is reﬂective of the same


                                                                Page 19 of 32
factors for the larger submission data for the full year. There have been no indications of
unfairness against speciﬁc groups.
76. Have you tested system performance for clients with a variety of different
disabilities?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
77. Describe any differences in system performance identiﬁed and mitigations in
place to address them.
Through several iterations of testing, we used a subset of claims (conditions) with
representations of gender, age, language and geographic location that is reﬂective of the
same factors for the larger submission data for the full year. There have been no
differences in system performance identiﬁed.
78. Are there clients or groups of clients that will experience the most signiﬁcant
negative impacts from the system being used?
No [ Points: +0 ]
79. Describe
No groups of clients have been identiﬁed that will experience negative impacts from the
use of the CST. All decisions remain fully human-made. Decision makers may use the
summary to support their review, but they retain full access to the complete set of
documents reviewed by the CST and can independently verify all information. The CST
does not constrain a decision maker’s ability to exercise discretion, nor does it limit the
evidence available for consideration.
80. What proportion of clients will the system be applied to?
76 to 99% [ Points: +0 ]
81. Could not being subject to the use of the tool have a negative impact on an
individual or groups of individuals?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
82. Describe
Claims not processed using the CST will not beneﬁt from improved turnaround times and
their Disability Beneﬁt decision will take longer to make.
83. The impact of individuals being wrongfully included or overlooked by the system
could be:
Little to no impact [ Points: +1 ]
84. Describe why the impact of being wrongfully included or overlooked by the system
is as selected.

                                                                Page 20 of 32
There is no indication that individuals will be wrongfully included or overlooked by the CST.
The CST provides partial automation limited to administrative tasks; speciﬁcally,
extracting, organizing, and summarizing information from Disability Beneﬁt applications
and supporting documentation. It does not make decisions, determine eligibility, or
generate outputs that inﬂuence decisions requiring judgment or discretion.
Because the CST does not replace human decision making, does not limit access to
information, and does not generate determinations that could affect an individual’s
beneﬁts, rights, or entitlements, the use of the CST does not create a risk of individuals
being wrongfully included or overlooked.
About the Data
85. Will the system use personal information as input data?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
86. Have you veriﬁed that the collection of personal information is limited to only what
is directly related to a program or activity of your institution?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
87. Is the personal information of individuals used in a decision-making process that
affects those individuals?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
88. Have you veriﬁed whether the system is using personal information in a way that is
consistent with: (a) the current personal information banks (PIBs) and privacy impact
assessments (PIAs) of your programs or (b) planned or implemented modiﬁcations to
the PIBs or PIAs that take new uses and processes into account?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
89. List relevant PIB numbers.
VAC PPU 601,VAC PPU 602,VAC PPU 604,VAC PPU 700,VAC PPU 716,VAC PPU 717,VAC
PPU 718
90. Will the personal information be shared (check all that apply)
Within your department [ Points: +1 ]
91. Is the training and testing data for the system representative of the clients being
served?Yes [ Points: +0 ]
92. Describe how you have assessed that data was representative.
Through several iterations of testing and piloting, Veterans Affairs Canada used a subset of
claims (conditions) with representations of gender, age, and language that were reﬂective
of the same factors present in full-year submission data. No indications of unfairness
affecting speciﬁc groups were identiﬁed through this testing. Our Operations group will
                                                                Page 21 of 32
monitor outputs in the same manner on an ongoing basis. Findings from GBA+ analysis
and operational testing inform these ongoing monitoring activities.
93. Are there biases in the training data that could increase the likelihood of
discriminatory outcomes or lead to other impacts on human rights?
No [ Points: +0 ]
94. Explain the process taken to conﬁrm that there are no biases in the training data
that could increase the likelihood of discriminatory outcomes or other impacts on
human rights.
Testing was conducted using a subset of claims reﬂective of full-year submission data
across gender, age, and language. No indications of unfairness affecting speciﬁc groups
were identiﬁed, and ongoing operational monitoring is in place to identify potential issues
over time.
95. What is the highest security classiﬁcation of the input data used by the system?
(Select one)
Protected B [ Points: +3 ]
96. Are there measures in place to ensure the accuracy of the personal information
used?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
97. If yes, describe the measures taken to ensure and verify the accuracy of personal
information.
Information is collected directly from clients, other government agencies/ departments
and health professionals. Source documents are available to be viewed by users and are
cited speciﬁcally in the summary.
98. Who controls the data?
Federal Government [ Points: +1 ]
99. Will the system use data from multiple different sources?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
100. Will the system require input data from a network-connected device? (such as
Internet of Things, sensor)
No [ Points: +0 ]
101. Will the system interface with other IT systems?
Yes [ Points: +4 ]
102. Who collected the data used for training the system?

                                                                Page 22 of 32
Your institution [ Points: +1 ]
103. Who collected the input data used by the system?
Your institution [ Points: +1 ]
104. Describe the input data collected and used by the system, its source, method of
collection, and any quality assurance measures in place.
The CST uses information that is already collected and lawfully held by Veterans Affairs
Canada. The system does not collect new information from clients. The input data consists
of:

   •  Standardized Forms: The Application for Disability Beneﬁts (PEN 923) and speciﬁc
      Medical Questionnaires (e.g., Psychiatric/Psychological Conditions Medical
       Questionnaire, Thoracolumbar Spine Conditions Medical Questionnaire).

   •  Service Health Records: A wide variety of medical and personnel documents,
       including handwritten clinical progress notes, specialist reports (audiograms,
       surgical reports), and dental records spanning a Veterans career.

   •  Diagnostic Evidence: Medical reports and diagnostic imaging results provided by
       private practitioners or military medical officers.

   •  Service Documents: Personnel records utilized to conﬁrm service dates, rank, and
       unit deployment history.

   •  Source & Method of Collection The system retrieves documents exclusively from
      VAC’s official secure repositories. No data is scraped from the internet or unveriﬁed
       external sources.

   •   Interoperability (DND/RCMP): Service Health Records are retrieved directly through
      secure, established transfer protocols such as with the Department of National
      Defence (DND) and RCMP.

   •  Client Submission: Applicants can also submit evidence via My VAC Account
        (digital upload) or by mail. All documents received are ultimately stored
       electronically in .PDF format within our Digital Image (DIGIMG) document
       repository.

   •  System Retrieval: The CST uses the client’s unique identiﬁer (CSDN ID) to query the
     DIGIMG repository, retrieving only the speciﬁc ﬁles associated with the claimed
       condition (e.g., fetching only "Knee" related correspondence for a knee claim).
VAC employs a comprehensive end-to-end human oversight protocol. This framework
mandates that qualiﬁed staff validate the integrity of the application ﬁle prior to automated
summarization and verify the accuracy of the generated summary before any
administrative decision is ﬁnalized.


                                                                Page 23 of 32
   •  Pre-Processing Validation (Claims Preparation): Before the CST is ever triggered, the
       application ﬁle undergoes a manual "Claims Preparation" business process.
       Trained VAC staff review the application, medical questionnaires, and submitted
       materials to validate that the ﬁle is accurate and complete. This critical human
      gatekeeping ensures that the data fed into the tool is organized and ready for
       processing, preventing the system from analyzing incomplete or irrelevant ﬁles.

   •  Technical Precision (OCR): The system utilizes Azure AI Document Intelligence to
       accurately digitize complex inputs. This technology is capable of recognizing
      handwritten text and preserving document structure (tables, forms), ensuring that
       older, handwritten service records—which are often critical for long-standing
      veterans—are accurately captured in the summary.

   •  Post-Processing Veriﬁcation: The CST does not replace the source documents.
      Every fact, date, or medical ﬁnding in the generated summary includes a direct
       hyperlink back to the speciﬁc page in the original PDF. The Decision Maker is
       required to use these links to cross-reference the summary against the original
      evidence, ensuring that the ﬁnal decision is always grounded in the primary source
      documents, not just the AI output.

   •  "Manual Review Safeguard" Protocol : If the data quality is poor (e.g., illegible
      handwriting that OCR cannot parse) or the evidence is insufficient to support a
       favourable outcome, the decision maker will review the entire ﬁle manually before
       ﬁnalizing the decision.
105. Will the system require the analysis of unstructured data to make an
assessment, recommendation or decision?
Yes [ Points: +0 ]
106. What types of unstructured data? (Check all that apply)

   •  Audio and text ﬁles [ Points: +2 ]

   •  Images and videos [ Points: +4 ]
107. Has there been a decision to exclude certain data?
No [ Points: +0 ]





                                                                Page 24 of 32
Section 3.3: Mitigation Questions and Answers
Consultations
1. Internal Stakeholders (federal institutions, including the federal public service)
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
2. Which internal consultees or partners have you engaged?

   •  Access to Information and Privacy

   •  TBS Office of the Chief Information Officer

   •  Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada

   •  Program Policy

   •  Communications services

   •  Legal Services

   •  2SLGBTQI+ Secretariat

   •  Strategic Policy and Planning
3. External consultees or partners (groups in other sectors or jurisdictions).
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
4. Which external consultees or partners have you engaged?

   •  Bargaining Agents

   •  Other (describe)

   •  Clients or their Representatives
5. Please describe
Office of the Veterans Ombud, Bureau of Pensions Advocates, Veterans Review and
Appeal Bard, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, Veterans at VAC
6. Identify the consultees or partners and indicate the project lifecycle stage
(Concept, Design, Data collection and processing, Building or adapting the model,
Testing, Deployment, Production, Monitoring, Decommission) in which engagement
took place.
Engagement with internal and external stakeholders and partners has occurred throughout
the project lifecycle and was tailored to the nature of the expertise required at each stage.
Consultations were undertaken primarily at a strategic, governance, legal, privacy,
security, and program-integration level, consistent with the CST’s role as a decision-
support system.

                                                                Page 25 of 32
Concept and Design: Early engagement focused on validating the business need,
conﬁrming alignment with program authorities, assessing legal, privacy, security, and
data-governance considerations, and determining applicability of the Directive on
Automated Decision-Making and the Algorithmic Impact Assessment framework.
Data Collection and Processing: Consultations supported the identiﬁcation of appropriate
data sources, conﬁrmation of lawful authority for data use, privacy safeguards,
information management practices, and alignment with enterprise architecture, IT, and
security requirements.
Testing and Deployment: Engagement emphasized operational readiness, usability for
decision makers, transparency and traceability requirements, communications
considerations, and validation that the tool functions strictly as a decision-support aid.
Production and Monitoring: Ongoing engagement supports governance oversight,
performance monitoring, privacy and security compliance, audit and evaluation readiness,
and continuous improvement, including consideration of equity, accessibility, and GBA
Plus-related impacts.
Engagement is iterative and ongoing, with different areas and stakeholders being
consulted as the project evolves and as new risks, considerations, or lifecycle phases
arise.
7. Did you consult with the clients that will be most impacted by the system?
Yes [ Points: +3 ]
8. Did you consult with clients or communities that will be adversely impacted by the
system?
No [ Points: +0 ]
9. Explain why you did not consult the clients that will be adversely impacted by the
system.
No client groups were identiﬁed as being adversely impacted by the system because the
CST is only used when a favourable decision can be made by the decision maker.
10. Explain how you documented, analyzed and addressed the feedback received.
Feedback was documented and analyzed through structured records, including meeting
notes, consultation records, and review documentation. Feedback was consolidated into
tracking tables and crosswalks linking identiﬁed issues, risks, and recommendations to
speciﬁc system design elements, controls, or mitigation measures.
De-risking and Mitigation Measures - Data Quality
11. Do you have documented processes in place to test datasets against biases,
discrimination, and other unexpected outcomes? This could include experience in
applying frameworks, methods, guidelines, or other assessment tools.

                                                                Page 26 of 32
Yes [ Points: +3 ]
12. Is the documented process publicly available?
No [ Points: +0 ]
13. Have you developed a process to document how data quality issues were resolved
during the design process?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
14. Is the process publicly available?
No [ Points: +0 ]
15. Have you undertaken a Gender-based Analysis Plus (GBA Plus) of the data?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
16. Are the GBA Plus ﬁndings publicly available?
No [ Points: +0 ]
17. Summarize the ﬁndings or provide a link if publicly available.
Through multiple iterations of testing, a subset of claims (conditions) was used that
reﬂected the distribution of gender, age, language, and disability status present in full-year
submission data. The GBA+ analysis examined potential differential impacts on equity-
denied groups, including women, Indigenous Peoples, persons with disabilities, and
members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, with particular attention to persons with disabilities
given the nature of Disability Beneﬁts programs.
The GBA+ analysis did not identify material differential adverse impacts or discriminatory
outcomes for equity-denied groups. Findings indicate that the CST is expected to improve
productivity and processing times, resulting in improved service delivery to clients.
Speciﬁcally, the CST is expected to support faster access to Disability Beneﬁt decisions
and to the associated ﬁnancial beneﬁts and supports.
Over the longer term, improved workload management through the use of modernized and
automated tools is expected to increase Veterans Affairs Canada’s capacity to capture
and analyze client and program demographic data, including GBA+ data. Enhanced
availability and quality of demographic information is a key enabling factor for monitoring
equity outcomes and ensuring equitable access to programs and beneﬁts. As a result,
equity deserving Veteran groups are expected to beneﬁt from more timely processing of
Disability Beneﬁt applications, especially in light of the evolving demographic proﬁle of
Canadian Armed Forces personnel.
18. Do you have a documented process to manage the risk that low quality, outdated
or unreliable data is used to make an automated decision?
No [ Points: +0 ]

                                                                Page 27 of 32
19. Will the data used for this system be posted on the Open Government Portal?
No [ Points: +0 ]
De-Risking and Mitigation Measures – Procedural Fairness
20. Does the audit trail provide information to trace the chain of legislative authority
for the decision and key decision points?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
21. Are all key decision points in the automated system's logic linked to the relevant
legislation, policy or procedures?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
22. Does the audit trail capture all the recommendations or decisions made by the
system?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
23. Are all key decision points identiﬁable in the audit trail?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
24. Is there a process in place to log the instances when overrides were performed?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
25. Is there an up-to-date log of the changes made to the model and the system?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
26. Does the audit trail capture information that can be used to help generate an
explanation of the decision where required?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
27. Is the system able to produce reasons for its decisions or recommendations when
required?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
28. Does the audit trail identify precisely which version of the system was used for
each decision it supports?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
29. Does the audit trail show who the authorized decision-maker is?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
30. Is there a mechanism to capture feedback by users of the system?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]

                                                                Page 28 of 32
31. Describe how user feedback informs updates to the system.
The CST implements a "Finalize" process that captures user feedback at the end of their
review. User feedback is then reviewed and prioritized for inclusion in future development
sprints.
32. Is there a recourse process established for clients to challenge the decision?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
33. Provide information on the recourse process or link to a website where this is
described.
The recourse system available to Veterans remains unchanged. The CST does not alter,
limit, or replace any existing review or appeal rights. Disability Beneﬁts decisions continue
to be governed by a well-established legislative framework, including the Pension Act, the
Veterans Well-being Act, and the Veterans Review and Appeal Board Act, which together
provide multiple levels of recourse to support fairness, transparency, and procedural
integrity.
Veterans retain full access to all existing recourse mechanisms, including:

   •  Departmental Review – A review that may be initiated either by Veterans Affairs
     Canada or by the Veteran.

   •  Veterans Review and Appeal Board (VRAB) – Independent reviews and appeals of
      departmental decisions.

   •   Judicial Review – Applications for review to the Federal Court of Canada and the
      Federal Court of Appeal.
Veterans also continue to have access to the Bureau of Pensions Advocates, which
provides free legal assistance to Veterans in preparing submissions and navigating the
review and appeal process.
Additional information about the appeal and review process: How to review or appeal a
decision
(Full URL: https:// www.veterans.gc.ca/en/veterans-rights/how-appeal )
34. Does the audit trail include change control processes to record modiﬁcations to
the system's operation or performance?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
35. Does the system base its decision or recommendation on all of the information
provided by the client?
Not applicable [ Points: +0 ]



                                                                Page 29 of 32
36. Have you undertaken mitigations in algorithm development and model testing to
address bias and discrimination?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
37. Describe the metrics used and any mitigations taken to address identiﬁed issues.
The Department will monitor the performance of the CST over time using a combination of
accuracy-based and distributional metrics. Monitoring is conducted at an aggregate level
and, where appropriate, across relevant subgroups to identify potential performance
issues or unintended effects.
Human decision makers retain full authority for Disability Beneﬁts determinations and are
responsible for reviewing CST outputs as part of the adjudication process. Decision
makers are required to use the Tool as an input to their review, while retaining the ability to
conduct additional examination of the full application record where clariﬁcation or
veriﬁcation is required. This human-in-the-loop approach ensures that summaries
support, rather than replace, professional judgment.
Where monitoring or operational feedback identiﬁes potential performance issues or risks,
mitigation measures may include reﬁning prompts or model parameters, enhancing quality
assurance and guidance, increasing targeted human review, or implementing other
corrective actions in accordance with established governance and oversight processes.
38. Does the system only consider input data and information relevant to the
decision?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
39. Are the system rules directly relevant to the administrative decision?
No [ Points: +0 ]
40. Indicate additional procedural fairness protections in place (check all that apply):

   •  Clear time frame or service standards for timeliness [ Points: +1 ]

   •  Clients are provided with adequate information about the decision-making process
     and have the opportunity to meaningfully participate [ Points: +1 ]

   •  Clients are provided with all documents and information in which the administrative
       decision was based [ Points: +1 ]

   •  Mechanism for assessing and responding to client feedback [ Points: +1 ]
41. Are there processes in place to ensure impartiality and ethical conduct by the
decision maker in the use of the system and its outputs?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]



                                                                Page 30 of 32
42. Have you undertaken training on appropriate use and awareness of risks
associated with automation bias?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
43. Will your team be regularly retraining the model or reviewing the rules?
No [ Points: +0 ]
44. Do you have monitoring processes in place to detect changes in system
performance overtime?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
45. Do you have a process in place to update the system based on the monitoring
results?
Yes [ Points: +1 ]
46. Describe
We will both monitor results and collect user feedback via a questionnaire. Feedback will
be shared and reviewed with the development team. Items will be prioritized and
addressed based on level of urgency.
De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Privacy
47. If your system uses or creates personal information, have you undertaken a PIA, or
updated an existing one?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
48. Indicate the following in your answer: Title and scope of the PIA; How the
automation project ﬁts into the program; and Date of PIA completion or modiﬁcation.
The Privacy Impact Assessment for the Disability Beneﬁts Program was conducted to
support the introduction of the CST, which is used in the delivery of the Disability Beneﬁts
program. The CST does not introduce the collection of new personal information, but it
processes personal information that is collected by Veterans Affairs Canada for the
administration of the program as outlined in the Disability Beneﬁts Privacy Impact
Assessment and all relevant Personal Information Banks, and as authorized by the Pension
Act and the Veterans Well-being Act. The Privacy Impact Assessment was completed in
February 2026.
49. Have you designed and built security into your systems from the concept stage of
the project?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
50. Describe


                                                                Page 31 of 32
Security controls were incorporated from the concept stage of the project and applied
throughout design and implementation. Access to CST summaries is restricted through
role-based access controls managed via Active Directory assignments, ensuring that only
authorized users can view summaries. PDF copies of summaries are stored within
Veterans Affairs Canada’s approved Digital Images database, which is itself access-
restricted to speciﬁc user groups.
Security controls were reviewed and validated through the completion of a
Security Statement of Authorization. Operational approval was granted because adequate
security controls have been applied and residual risks have been assessed and reduced to
an acceptable level in accordance with departmental security requirements.
51. Have you designed and built privacy into your systems from the concept stage of
the project?
Yes [ Points: +2 ]
52. Describe
Only authorized users can request and review summaries.
53. Is the information used within a closed system (no connections to the Internet,
Intranet or any other system)?
No [ Points: +0 ]
54. If the disclosing of personal information is involved, has an agreement or
arrangement with appropriate safeguards been established?
No [ Points: +0 ]
55. Will you de-identify any personal information used or created by the system at any
point in the lifecycle?
No [ Points: +0 ]





                                                                Page 32 of 32