Algorithmic Impact Assessment Results

Version: 0.10.0
Project Details
1. Name of Respondent
Bradley Belanger

2. Job Title
Director General / Directeur général

3. Department
Canada Border Services Agency

4. Branch
Intelligence and Enforcement / Renseignement et exécution de la loi

5. Project Title
Client Reporting and Engagement System (CRES/ReportIn) / Système de
Rapports et d’engagement des Clients (SREC)/JeMePrésente

6. Project ID from IT Plan
PRJ-00005299

7. Departmental Program (from Department Results Framework)
Border Enforcement / Detentions / Exécution de la loi à la frontière /
Détentions

8. Project Phase
Implementation                                                                                                           [ Points: 0 ]

9. Please provide a project description:
Background

Canada’s immigration detention program is governed by the Immigration and
Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) and the Immigration and Refugee Protection
Regulations (IRPR). The Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is
responsible for monitoring and enforcing conditions imposed on individuals in
Canada under the IRPA and the IRPR.

The National Immigration Detention Framework (NIDF) was approved by
Parliament in 2016 to create a better, fairer immigration detention system that
supports the humane and dignified treatment of individuals while protecting
public safety. Immigration detention is based on the principle that detention
shall be used only as a measure of last resort, in limited circumstances. In
certain cases, however, detention may be deemed necessary when:
1.  an individual presents a risk to public safety (i.e. when an individual has a
documented history or pattern of violent or aggressive crimes/behaviour),
2.  the CBSA is unable to establish an individual’s legitimate identity, and/or
3.  the behaviour of the individual threatens program integrity (i.e. such as
immigration proceedings or removal).
When detention must take place, the CBSA uses improved risk assessment
processes, developed through the NIDF, to ensure that detainees are placed in
the most appropriate facility at the time of detention.

Several factors must be considered when deciding to detain an individual,
including the availability and potential use of all alternatives to detention
(ATDs). Over the last eight years, the CBSA has reduced the use of detention
by increasing ATDs. ATDs, such as in-person reporting, Community Case
Management and Supervision, and Electronic Monitoring, are used to
effectively release individuals into the communities while ensuring public
safety and immigration program integrity.

The CBSA has now further expanded ATDs by developing a voluntary
smartphone app named ReportIn that allows foreign nationals and permanent
residents subject to immigration enforcement conditions to report to the
CBSA remotely.

The app uses facial comparison and geographic data to verify the identity and
location of individuals.

The app was developed in compliance with Government of Canada standards
on applications for mobile devices. In addition, feedback from the Privacy
Commissioner was included in the development of the app and a Privacy
Impact Assessment (PIA) has been completed.

About ReportIn/CRES
Reporting conditions are imposed by the CBSA, Immigration, Refugees and
Citizenship Canada (IRCC) or the Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB) on a
case-by-case basis under the IRPA. A common condition imposed is the
requirement to report on a regular reporting schedule to the CBSA. The
voluntary CBSA ReportIn app will allow individuals subject to reporting
conditions to report to the CBSA without physically attending a CBSA office.
The ReportIn app will provide a secure process for individuals to report to the
CBSA without coming in person to one of our offices while also enhancing the
CBSA ability monitor individuals who report remotely.

CBSA CRES/ReportIn solution consists of:
•  A voluntary public-facing smartphone app, ReportIn, where individuals
submit reports using a mobile device/smartphone and facial images as a
form of authenticating the individuals’ identity. The individuals’ facial
biometrics and location, provided by sensors and/or the GPS in the mobile
device/smartphone, are recorded when they report through the ReportIn app
and is sent to the cloud-based processing and monitoring system, CRES.
•  A Cloud-based processing and monitoring backend system, CRES, allows
CBSA immigration enforcement personnel to monitor, contact and assess an
individual’s reporting facial images, locations, reporting frequency, and
compliance history without individuals having to physically attend a CBSA
office.

Using the mobile app, the individual submits photos that are then compared to
a reference photo and a similarity score is generated by a facial comparison
algorithm. In addition to the automated similarity scoring, CBSA trained staff
will review, for every report made by an individual, the submitted photos and a
determination will be made whether the submitted photos are a match to the
individual.

The individuals’ location is also collected every time they report and if the
individual fails to comply with their conditions.

ReportIn also allows for one-way CBSA direct messaging with individuals,
which will make communication with the individual using the ReportIn app
easier.

Other than facial biometric data, the supplemental types of personal
information collected by ReportIn includes given and family name, Unique
Client Identifier (UCI), personal email address, phone number, employment
information (if applicable), facial photos, ad hoc report text, location, device
ID, device model, device operating system version, error message, and trace
information (where error happened).

As previously stated, an individuals’ location will be collected and recorded
when the following events occur:
•  When an individual submits their report on their scheduled reporting date,
the location, sent by sensors and/or the GPS in the mobile device/
smartphone, is recorded when an individual reports through the ReportIn app
and is sent to the cloud-based processing and monitoring system CRES. The
EnStream location will also be used and connect only to the CRES backend
system. The EnStream service operates externally from and is not connected
to the ReportIn app however may be used to collect location when an
investigation is opened and the individual has not complied with remote
reporting conditions.

The operational benefits of the project are:
•  Improved management of the inventory of individuals the CBSA must
monitor up until they are removed from Canada or the individual becomes a
permanent resident of Canada, a Canadian Citizen, granted protected person
status in Canada or their temporary resident status is restored.
•  The ReportIn validation process is much more time efficient than an in-
person meeting and provides greater operational flexibility in light of
fluctuating volumes of clients. As such, the ReportIn app is expected to
increase monitoring capability while streamlining costs.

The benefits to the individuals are:
•  Improved communication, transparency and allowing more individuals an
alternative to in-person reporting and improving the engagement with the
CBSA.
•  Facilitating a secure process for individuals to enroll and report to the
CBSA.
•  Improving support to individuals with accessibility needs where they do not
need to attend a CBSA office and providing a more accessible means to report
e.g. less time off work, reduced child care cost, reduced transportation cost
and/or travel time etc.

During enrollment the CBSA staff verifies the individual during an in-person or
virtual meeting.

ReportIn uses Amazon Rekognition, a facial recognition software, to perform
a comparison of a photo of a known individual against a reference photo. This
comparison generates a similarity score, indicating if the individual who is
reporting is in fact the individual on reporting conditions. The software
comparison performed is a one-to-one comparison and, to note, is not a one
to many comparison. It is also important to note that the software does not
compare images against a database of publicly collected images.

All submissions will undergo 100% human oversight. This approach ensures
that human judgment and discretion are applied to the results, promoting
accountability and accuracy in the system's operation.

There are three levels of review. If a facial comparison match is not confirmed,
the Alternatives to Detention Monitoring Centre Officer (ATD MCO), of the
Alternatives to Detention Monitoring Centre (ATD MC), may contact the
individual within a day or two for a follow up investigation. If the ATD MCO is
still unable to confirm a facial comparison match, they will refer the case to
the Alternatives to Detention Monitoring Centre Supervisor (ATD MCS). If the
ATD MCS has additional questions or they are unable to confirm a facial
comparison match, they will refer the case to the Regional Inland Enforcement
office for investigation by an Inland Enforcement Officer (IEO). If the follow up
investigation results in the IEO determining that the individual has not
complied with their conditions, the individual could be detained as per the
IRPA and IRPR.

The benefits to the individual and CBSA includes process optimization and
workflow automation. The software provides process optimization by
analyzing large images (data sets) to identify anomalies which assists in
providing workflow automation. Workflow automation allows CBSA to utilize
resources in other capacities due to the remote reporting option by not
requiring individuals to attend the CBSA office.

About The System
10. Please check which of the following capabilities apply to your system.
Image and object recognition: Analyzing very large data sets to automate the
recognition, classification, and context associated with an image or object.
Process optimization and workflow automation: Analyzing large data sets to
identify and anomalies, cluster patterns, predict outcomes or ways to
optimize; and automate specific workflows

Section 1: Impact Level : 2

Current Score: 63

Raw Impact Score: 63

Mitigation Score: 31
Section 2: Requirements Specific to Impact Level 2
Peer review

Consult at least one of the following experts and publish the complete review or a plain language
summary of the findings on a Government of Canada website:
    qualified expert from a federal, provincial, territorial or municipal government institution
    qualified members of faculty of a post-secondary institution
    qualified researchers from a relevant non-governmental organization
   contracted third-party vendor with a relevant specialization
   a data and automation advisory board specified by Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat.

OR

Publish specifications of the automated decision system in a peer-reviewed journal. Where
access to the published review is restricted, ensure that a plain language summary of the
findings is openly available.
Gender-based Analysis Plus

Ensure that the Gender-based Analysis Plus addresses the following issues:

   impacts of the automation project (including the system, data and decision) on gender and/or
   other identity factors;
   planned or existing measures to address risks identified through the Gender-based Analysis
   Plus.
Notice

Plain language notice posted through all service delivery channels in use (Internet, in person,
mail or telephone).
Human-in-the-loop for decisions

Decisions may be rendered without direct human involvement.
Explanation

In addition to any applicable legal requirement, ensure that a meaningful explanation is provided
to the client with any decision that results in the denial of a benefit or service, or involves a
regulatory action. The explanation must inform the client in plain language of:

   the role of the system in the decision-making process;
   the training and client data, their source, and method of collection, as applicable;
   the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to process it;
   the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to interpret it in the
   context of the administrative decision; and
   a justification of the administrative decision, including the principal factors that led to it.

Explanations must also inform clients of relevant recourse options, where appropriate.

A general description of these elements must also be made available through the Algorithmic
Impact Assessment and discoverable via a departmental website.
Training

Documentation on the design and functionality of the system.
IT and business continuity management

None
Approval for the system to operate

None
Other requirements

The Directive on Automated Decision-Making also includes other requirements that must be met
for all impact levels.

Link to the Directive on Automated Decision-Making

Contact your institution's ATIP office to discuss the requirement for a Privacy Impact
Assessment as per the Directive on Privacy Impact Assessment.
Section 3: Questions and Answers
Section 3.1: Impact Questions and Answers
Reasons for Automation
1. What is motivating your team to introduce automation into this decision-making process?
(Check all that apply)
Existing backlog of work or cases
The system is performing tasks that humans could not accomplish in a
reasonable period of time
Use innovative approaches

2. What client needs will the system address and how will this system meet them? If possible,
describe how client needs have been identified.
The client needs the system will address are:
•  Remote reporting instead of in-person reporting will save the individual
time and money by not having to travel or arrange transportation or childcare,
as well as save on time away from employment.
•  Allow more individuals with a remote reporting option as the voluntary app
does not require a data plan, only access to Wi-Fi.
•  Improved accuracy of verification of identity and location given the
improved technology.
•  Increased compliance from individuals as remote reporting is easier to
access than in-person reporting which will increase the compliance rates.
•  Provide eligible individuals with a secure and convenient means of
reporting.

3. Please describe any public benefits the system is expected to have.
The public benefits the Client Reporting and Engagement System (CRES)/
ReportIn system is expected to have:
•  Improve and modernize interactions the CBSA has with individuals subject
to reporting requirements.
•  Improve the CBSA monitoring of individuals on reporting conditions
through improved identity verification and location services which may
decrease the number of warrants issued and benefit the public by meeting our
public safety mandate.
•  The CBSA will reuse information technology micro-service sub-systems
across government services and departments rather than procuring new
systems and technology which will provide cost savings benefits to the public.
•  Provide a remote reporting option for individuals on reporting conditions.
This will decrease the number of in-person reporting individuals, which will in
turn reduce the time CBSA staff meet with individuals providing additional
cost savings to the public.

4. How effective will the system likely be in meeting client needs?
Very effective                                                                                                               [ Points: +0 ]

5. Please describe any improvements, benefits, or advantages you expect from using an
automated system. This could include relevant program indicators and performance targets.
The improvements, benefits and advantages the CBSA expect from using the
CRES/ReportIn are:
•  Enhancing compliance by individuals with an easy to use voluntary app
using facial biometrics comparison for identification purposes.
•  Reducing detention costs by providing access to a remote reporting ATD.
•  Enhancing CBSA relations with individuals by facilitating a secure process
for individuals to enroll and report without coming in person to a CBSA office.
•  Allowing CBSA to more effectively monitor individuals who report remotely
through submission of the individual’s location at the same time as the
submission of the report photos.
•  Having the ability to receive regular updates from the individual through the
app on their residential address, employment, among other things, will allow
the CBSA to have relevant information on the individual that can be used to
contact and monitor them for any early indicators of non-compliance.
•  Allowing for, when appropriate, an accessible alternative to in-person
reporting requirements, and having an enhanced verification and monitoring
system.
•  Building and maintaining relationships with CBSA and individuals will
ensure individuals are fully aware of their obligations and have a process for
getting timely answers to any questions about the status of their case.
•  Providing CBSA the ability to track trends and patterns of individuals (e.g.
individuals that may attempt to hide or falsify their identity by submitting
photos obscuring their face or providing photos of another individual, attempt
to hide or falsify their location, etc.).
•  Reducing non-compliance of individuals by providing a more reliable
remote reporting option that can be accessed by more individuals that will
allow anyone with a smartphone or mobile device with access to Wi-Fi or
cellular data to use the app.

6. Please describe how you will ensure that the system is confined to addressing the client
needs identified above.
The CBSA will ensure the system is confined to address individual needs by:
•  The CRES/ReportIn will be rolled out as a tool that enables CBSA officers
to more effectively manage individuals within the community as a means to
support the ATD mandate. It will provide a safe and secure remote reporting
option to submit 5 facial view photos and their point-in-time location
information while ensuring that individuals are not constantly tracked.
•  Individuals required to report to the CBSA will be assessed for eligibility for
ReportIn by a CBSA officer. The assessment will include, but is not limited to,
the individual having a smartphone or mobile device and be willing to comply
with the reporting conditions. Positive eligibility will provide enhanced
accessibility to remote reporting and will provide individual financial cost
savings (e.g. not having to in person report, take time off work, find childcare
and/or reduce transportation costs).
•  CBSA has developed step-by-step instructions, including screenshots, for
the voluntary ReportIn app and how to: download the app; create an account
in the app; report and submit photos in the app; and get assistance with the
app.
•  The voluntary ReportIn app is available in 16 languages, including English
and French, in order to allow individuals to have greater accessibility using the
app and increase compliance with reporting conditions with the app.
•  CBSA’s ReportIn Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) and Privacy Policy
provides individuals with the appropriate safeguards for their facial biometrics
information which will not be used for any other purpose (including by the
supplier) than stated.
•  CBSA’s contract with Amazon Web Service (AWS) includes a nondisclosure
agreement providing additional safeguards for individuals’ information using
remote reporting through ReportIn. AWS will not access, use or disclose
personal information except as needed to provide services under contract
and/or to provide notifications of personal data breaches.
•  Using ReportIn, an app that works with Wi-Fi, will save individuals money by
not requiring a data plan for connectivity and will allow a greater number of
individuals to have access to an alternative to detention and an alternative to
reporting in person to a CBSA office; although a data plan may also be used.
•  CBSA staff will receive training on the use of the one-way messaging
feature used to contact individuals. The training will provide CBSA staff
instructions that all contact with individuals is to be in compliance with the
Public Service Values and Ethics and CBSA Code of Conduct.

7. Please describe any trade-offs between client interests and program objectives that you have
considered during the design of the project.
•  CRES/ReportIn is accessible to a wide range of individuals and individuals
are more likely to comply when there is an automated system available for
remote reporting compared to in-person reporting where CBSA are more likely
to see an increase in individual non-compliance due to several factors e.g.
transportation costs, loss of employment time, child care issues and costs,
etc.
•  The voluntary app will collect facial biometrics and an accurate location,
which may be perceived as an impact on the privacy of individuals on
reporting condition. This collection of information was weighed against the
objectives of the ATD program and the requirements of the IRPA and IRPR.

8. Have alternative non-automated processes been considered?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

9. If non-automated processes were considered, why was automation identified as the preferred
option?
Yes non-automated processes have been considered, specifically individual in-
person reporting. In-person reporting has been identified by individuals to be a
hardship for them based on employment needs, childcare needs, cost of
transportation, time for transportation (e.g. individuals residing in northern
Saskatchewan or Manitoba may have to travel 6 to 8 hours by vehicle to
attend a CBSA office in person). The remote reporting voluntary app will allow
for more individuals to access an ATD in a timely fashion.

In-person reporting is still an option for those individuals that are determined
by the CBSA to not be eligible for remote reporting, for those individuals that
do not or cannot report remotely and for those individuals that do not choose
or do not agree to use remote reporting as an option.

Individuals are more likely to comply when there is an automated system
available for remote reporting compared to in-person reporting. This is based
on direct complaints from individuals, where CBSA are more likely to see an
increase in individual non-compliance due to several factors e.g.
transportation costs, loss of employment time, child care issues and costs,
etc.

10. What would be the consequence of not deploying the system?
Other (please specify)                                                                                                 [ Points: 0 ]
Service cannot be delivered in a timely or efficient manner                                     [ Points: +2 ]
Service costs are too high                                                                                          [ Points: 0 ]
Service cannot be delivered at all                                                                               [ Points: +3 ]
Service quality is not as high                                                                                      [ Points: 0 ]

11. Please describe
The other consequence of not deploying the CRES/ReportIn solution may lead
to more individuals having to report in person, being detained or remaining in
detention if an appropriate ATD system is not implemented.

Risk Profile
12. Is the project within an area of intense public scrutiny (e.g. because of privacy concerns)
and/or frequent litigation?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

13. Are clients in this line of business particularly vulnerable?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

14. Are stakes of the decisions very high?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

15. Will this project have major impacts on staff, either in terms of their numbers or their roles?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

16. Will the use of the system create or exacerbate barriers for persons with disabilities?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

Project Authority
17. Will you require new policy authority for this project?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

About the Algorithm
18. The algorithm used will be a (trade) secret
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]
19. The algorithmic process will be difficult to interpret or to explain
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +3 ]

About the Decision
20. Please describe the decision(s) that will be automated.
The decision that will be automated is the facial comparison portion of the
process.**

ReportIn uses Amazon Rekognition, a facial recognition software, to perform
a comparison of an individual’s report photo against an individual’s reference
photo (known individual) stored in CRES. This comparison generates a
similarity score, between the enrollment/reference photo and an individual’s
report photo, indicating a percentage similarity score of likelihood that the
individual who is reporting is the individual on reporting conditions as
indicated by their enrollment/reference photo. The default similarity score for
a photo match is 99%.  If a score of under 99% is returned from the software,
the result is failed biometrics. If a score of over 99% is returned from the
software, the result is passed biometrics. There are several reasons that a
result may return at less than 99% and failed biometrics, such as but not
limited to, the angle of the face is less than or more than expected, the photo
is blurry, the photo is that of another person, etc.

The software analyzes the facial attributes of the face, and then returns a
percent similarity score for the face and the facial attributes that are detected
in the image e.g. beard, eyeglasses, eyes open, landmarks of the face (e.g.
position of nose, mouth).

It is important to note that the software does not compare images against a
database of publicly collected images.

All submissions will undergo 100% human oversight by a CBSA employee.
This approach ensures that human judgment and discretion are applied to the
results, promoting accountability and accuracy in the system's operation.

After the software similarity score is returned and displayed in CRES, each
case and/or report is assigned to an ATD MCO to review. The ATD MCO
makes the decision on whether or not the report photo is a ‘match’ or ‘no
match’. The ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s
determination of the photo match and, when a specified location to report
from has been imposed, the individual’s location when they reported. There
are three levels of review. All cases and reports will be assigned to an ATD
MCO for review. If an individual fails a facial comparison match or location
match and the ATD MCO is not able to make a final decision that there is a
match, the ATD MCO will contact the individual within a day or two for a follow
up investigation. If the ATD MCO still has questions they will refer it to the ATD
MCS, if the ATD MCS has additional questions they will refer it to the Regional
Inland Enforcement office for investigation by an Inland Enforcement Officer
(IEO). If the follow up investigation results in the IEO deciding that the
individual has not complied with their conditions, the individual could be
detained as per the IRPA and the IRPR.

21. Does the decision pertain to any of the categories below (check all that apply):
Other (please specify)                                                                                                 [ Points: +1 ]
22. Please describe
The CRES/ReportIn voluntary app is an ATD system that may allow
individuals, subject to reporting conditions under the IRPA or IRPR, to report
remotely rather than to be detained in a facility or as an option to be released
from detention.

Impact Assessment
23. Which of the following best describes the type of automation you are planning?
Partial automation (the system will contribute to administrative decision-
making by supporting an officer through assessments, recommendations,
intermediate decisions, or other outputs)                                                                  [ Points: +2 ]

24. Please describe the role of the system in the decision-making process.
The decision that will be automated is the facial comparison portion of the
process.**

The process begins with CBSA staff determining eligibility of an individual for
remote reporting. When an individual is eligible, CBSA staff provide an
explanation of ReportIn to the client and obtains the client consent for remote
reporting. Once consent is received, CBSA staff obtain the current client
information of telephone number and email address.

During the enrollment process, the CBSA staff verifies the individual during an
in-person or virtual meeting. The individual is advised to download the
voluntary ReportIn app onto their smartphone or mobile device. Once the app
is downloaded, the individual is instructed to create their account using their
first name, last name, email address and telephone number. For
authentication purposes, the individual is asked to input their UCI as well as a
Multifactor Authentication (MFA) code sent to their email address. After
successfully creating their account in ReportIn, the individual is instructed to
review their contact information displayed in the app which was created in
CRES and transmitted to ReportIn.  If the information is correct, the client
clicks yes and continues to the next step.

The individual is instructed to take 5 facial photo views in a randomized order
(looking up, looking down, looking left, looking right and looking straight
ahead). The facial photos taken at this step are the individual’s enrollment
photos. CBSA staff choose this facial photo, looking straight ahead, as the
reference facial photo and avatar photo for the individual in CRES. This
reference photo can be changed in time due to facial changes such as, but not
limited to, plastic surgery, accident, etc.

Once the 5 photo views are taken for enrollment, the individual is instructed to
complete their first report. The following steps are completed: log into
ReportIn with their email address and password, verify their personal
information and submit their 5 facial photo views to report. Once the 5 facial
photo views are submitted in ReportIn, the 5 facial photos are sent to Amazon
Rekognition for facial comparison.

For background, the software offers pre-trained and customizable computer
vision (CV) capabilities to extract information and insights from the individual
submitted images.
The software analyzes the facial attributes of the face, and then returns a
percent similarity score for the face and the facial attributes that are detected
in the image e.g. beard, eyeglasses, eyes open, landmarks of the face (e.g.
position of nose, mouth).

**ReportIn uses Amazon Rekognition, a facial recognition software, to
perform a comparison of an individual’s reported photo against an individual’s
referenced photo (known individual) stored in CRES. This comparison
generates a similarity score, between the enrollment/reference photo and an
individual’s report photo, indicating a percentage similarity score of likelihood
that the individual who is reporting is the individual on reporting conditions as
indicated by their enrollment/reference photo. The default similarity score for
a photo match is 99%. If a score of under 99% is returned from the software,
the result is failed biometrics. If a score of over 99% is returned from the
software, the result is passed biometrics. There are several reasons that a
result may return at less than 99% and failed biometrics, such as but not
limited to, the angle of the face is less than or more than expected, the photo
is blurry, the photo is that of another person, etc.

It is important to note that the software does not compare images against a
database of publicly collected images.

All submissions will undergo 100% human oversight. This approach ensures
that human judgment and discretion are applied to the results, promoting
accountability and accuracy in the system's operation.

After the software similarity score is returned and displayed in CRES, each
case and/or report is assigned to an ATD Monitoring Centre Officer (MCO) to
review. The ATD MCO makes the decision on whether or not the report photo
is a ‘match’ or ‘no match’. The ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the
ATD MCO’s determination of the photo match and, when a specified location
to report from has been imposed, the individual’s location when they reported.


There are three levels of review. All cases and reports will be assigned to an
ATD MCO for review. If an individual fails a facial comparison match or
location match and the ATD MCO is not able to make a final decision that
there is a match, the ATD MCO will contact the individual within a day or two a
follow up investigation. If the ATD MCO still has questions they will refer it to
the ATD MCS, if the ATD MCS has additional questions they will refer it to the
Regional Inland Enforcement office for investigation by an IEO. If the follow up
investigation results in the IEO deciding that the individual has not complied
with their conditions, the individual could be detained as per the IRPA and the
IRPR.

25. Will the system be making decisions or assessments that require judgement or discretion?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

26. Please describe the criteria used to evaluate client data and the operations applied to
process it.
After the individual downloads the voluntary ReportIn app and creates their
account in ReportIn, at the enrollment stage, with the CBSA staff present, 5
facial photos views of an individual’s face are taken through the ReportIn app
of the individual at various angles in randomized order and then uploaded to
CRES.
Looking straight ahead
Looking up
Looking down
Left side of the face
Right side of the face

As per set reporting conditions, at each report the individual will provide 5 new
photos. These photos will be requested in a random order each time in the
ReportIn app.
Looking straight ahead
Looking up
Looking down
Left side of the face
Right side of the face

Once the 5 photo views are taken for enrollment, the individual is instructed to
complete their first report. The following steps are completed: log into
ReportIn with their email address and password, verify their personal
information and submit their 5 photo views to report. Once the 5 photo views
are submitted in ReportIn, they are sent to Amazon Rekognition for facial
comparison.

ReportIn uses Amazon Rekognition, a facial recognition software, to perform
a comparison of an individual’s report photo against an individual’s reference
photo (known individual) stored in CRES. This comparison generates a
similarity score, between the enrollment/reference photo and an individual’s
report photo, indicating a percentage similarity score of likelihood that the
individual who is reporting is the individual on reporting conditions as
indicated by their enrollment/reference photo. The default similarity score for
a photo match is 99%. If a score of under 99% is returned from the software,
the result is failed biometrics. If a score of over 99% is returned from the
software, the result is passed biometrics. There are several reasons that a
result may return at less than 99% and failed biometrics, such as but not
limited to, the angle of the face is less than or more than expected, the photo
is blurry, the photo is that of another person, etc.

It is important to note that the software does not compare images against a
database of publicly collected images.

After the software similarity score is returned and displayed in CRES, each
case and or report is assigned to an ATD MCO to review. The ATD MCO makes
the decision on whether or not the report photo is a ‘match’ or ‘no match’. The
‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s determination of the
photo match and, when a specified location to report from has been imposed,
the individual’s location when they reported.

All CBSA staff using CRES are required to take the CBSA Facial Comparison
Course prior to access being granted access to CRES as part of their job
duties.

To further mitigate the risk of false results, all submissions will have 100%
human oversight by a CBSA employee. CBSA staff will review the individual’s
reference photo and the current report photo against the software results to
assess and address potential accuracy, bias and other performance issues
associated with the software. The backend system CRES will store the images
including the enrollment photo, reference photo and report photos.

After the software similarity score is returned and displayed in CRES, each
case and/or report is assigned to an ATD MCO to review. The ATD MCO
makes the decision on whether or not the report photo is a ‘match’ or ‘no
match’. The ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s
determination of the photo match and, when a specified location to report
from has been imposed, the individual’s location when they reported.

There are three levels of review. All cases and reports will be assigned to an
ATD MCO for review.  If an individual fails a facial comparison match or
location match and the ATD MCO is not able to make a final decision that
there is a match, the ATD MCO will contact the individual within a day or two a
follow up investigation. If the ATD MCO still has questions they will refer it to
the ATD MCS, if the ATD MCS has additional questions they will refer it to the
Regional Inland Enforcement office for investigation by an IEO. If the follow up
investigation results in the IEO deciding that the individual has not complied
with their conditions, the individual could be detained as per the IRPA and the
IRPR.

The backend system CRES will store the images including the enrollment
photo, reference photo and report photos.

27. Please describe the output produced by the system and any relevant information needed to
interpret it in the context of the administrative decision.
ReportIn uses Amazon Rekognition, a facial recognition software, to perform
a comparison of an individual’s report photo against an individual’s reference
photo (known individual) stored in CRES. This comparison generates a
similarity score, between the enrollment/reference photo and an individual’s
report photo, indicating a percentage similarity score of likelihood that the
individual who is reporting is the individual on reporting conditions as
indicated by their enrollment/reference photo. The similarity default score for
a photo match is 99%. If a score of under 99% is returned from the software,
the result is failed biometrics. If a score of over 99% is returned from the
software, the result is passed biometrics. There are several reasons that a
result may return at less than 99% and failed biometrics, such as but not
limited to, the angle of the face is less than or more than expected, the photo
is blurry, the photo is that of another person, etc. After the software similarity
score is returned and displayed in CRES, each case and or report is assigned
to an ATD MCO to review.

The ATD MCO makes the decision on whether or not the report photo is a
‘match’ or ‘no match’. The ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD
MCO’s determination of the photo match.

28. Will the system perform an assessment or other operation that would not otherwise be
completed by a human?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

29. Is the system used by a different part of the organization than the ones who developed it?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]
30. Are the impacts resulting from the decision reversible?
Reversible                                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

31. How long will impacts from the decision last?
Some impacts may last a matter of months, but some lingering impacts may
last longer                                                                                                                    [ Points: +2 ]

32. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The impacts are reversible at each of the three levels of review. If an individual
fails the facial photo comparison for scoring under 99%, their file is triaged as
a priority in the assignment of cases to the ATD MCO for review. The ATD
MCO of the ATD MC reviews the file, if they suspect the facial comparison is
not a match, the file is then reviewed by the ATD MCS. If they are also in
agreement, the file is transferred to the Regional Inland Enforcement office for
investigation. During the investigation process, the individual will be provided
an opportunity to provide information/evidence in person.

Example: individual had facial surgery, are in transition, etc. The Regional IEO
will review all the information/evidence, depending on the conclusion of the
investigation, the individual may be transferred to other ATD options or
continue with remote reporting.

All submissions will undergo 100% human oversight. The ATD MCO results
will be analyzed to assess potential accuracy versus software results. This
approach ensures that human judgment and discretion are applied to the
results, promoting accountability and accuracy in the system's operation. The
ATD MCO will be making the final decision, not the system.

The ATD MCO makes the final decision on whether or not the report photo is a
‘match’ or ‘no match’.  If one of the photo views fails the biometric match by
the software but the remainder of the photo views pass the biometric match,
the ATD MCO reviewing the file has the ability to make the overall decision as
a ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision and is based on the ATD MCO’s
determination.

33. The impacts that the decision will have on the rights or freedoms of individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

34. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
Amazon has conducted a third party (Credo AI) review of the face recognition
software to validate the performance and extract any inclinations of bias
based on a variety of demographic groups, the results of the evaluation were
99.9% facial match rate across 6 different demographic groups. It is also
important to note that this software is facial comparison based off of a photo
provided by CBSA. All individuals enrolled in ReportIn are voluntarily enrolled
and provide consent to the use of their likeness to verify their identity. The app
uses technology akin to the facial unlocking mechanism found in
smartphones.

To further mitigate the risk of false results, all submissions will have 100%
human oversight, and a comparison of the ATD MCO results versus software
results will be conducted to assess and address potential accuracy, bias and
other performance issues associated with the software. This approach
ensures that human judgment and discretion are applied to the results,
promoting accountability and accuracy in the system's operation. Additionally,
CBSA Communications has been consulted to develop comprehensive and
informative materials, which will be posted publicly to address potential
concerns surrounding the use of the technology and other performance
issues.

The ATD MCO makes the final decision on whether or not the report photo is a
‘match’ or ‘no match’.  If one of the photo views fails the biometric match by
the software but the remainder of the photo views pass the biometric match,
the ATD MCO reviewing the file has the ability to make the overall decision as
a ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s determination.

35. The impacts that the decision will have on the equality, dignity, privacy, and autonomy of
individuals will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

36. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
Individuals with religious obligations (e.g. veiled) will be accommodated by
the solution in that they are able to take their photos in a private location
allowing for equality, dignity, privacy and autonomy.

Amazon Rekognition has conducted a third party (Credo AI) review of the face
recognition software to validate the performance and extract any inclinations
of bias based on a variety of demographic groups, the results of the
evaluation were 99.9% facial match rate across 6 different demographic
groups. It is also important to note that this software is facial comparison
based off of a photo provided by CBSA. All individuals enrolled in ReportIn are
voluntarily enrolled and provide consent to the use of their likeness to verify
their identity. The voluntary app uses technology akin to the facial unlocking
mechanism found in smartphones.

To further mitigate the risk of false results, all submissions will have 100%
human oversight, and a comparison of the ATD MCO results versus software
results will be conducted to assess and address potential accuracy, bias and
other performance issues associated with the software. Additionally, CBSA
Communications has been consulted to develop comprehensive and
informative materials that address potential concerns surrounding the use of
the technology and other performance issues. This approach ensures that
human judgment and discretion are applied to the results, promoting
accountability and accuracy in the system's operation.

There are three levels of review. If an individual fails a facial comparison
match, the ATD MCO will contact the individual within a day or two for a follow
up investigation. If the ATD MCO still has questions they will refer it to the ATD
MCS, if the ATD MCS has additional questions they will refer it to the Regional
Inland Enforcement office for investigation by an IEO.

The ATD MCO makes the final decision on whether or not the report photo is a
‘match’ or ‘no match’.  If one of the photo views fails the biometric match by
the software, but the remainder of the photo views pass the biometric match,
the ATD MCO reviewing the file has the ability to make the overall decision as
a ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s determination.

37. The impacts that the decision will have on the health and well-being of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

38. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
The ATD MCO makes the final decision on whether or not the report photo is a
‘match’ or ‘no match’.  If one of the photo views fails the biometric match by
the software but the remainder of the photo views pass the biometric match,
the ATD MCO reviewing the file has the ability to make the overall decision as
a ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s determination.
Therefore, there is a low impact on the health of the individual.

39. The impacts that the decision will have on the economic interests of individuals will likely
be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

40. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
If an individual fails the facial photo comparison, their file is assigned to an
ATD MCO for review. Once the ATD MCO of the ATD MC reviews the file, and
they suspect the facial comparison is not a match, the file is then reviewed by
the ATD MCS. If they are also in agreement, the file is transferred to the
Regional Inland Enforcement office for investigation. During the investigation
process, the individual will be provided an opportunity to provide information/
evidence in person in regards to the investigation. Example: individual had
facial surgery, etc. Depending on the conclusion of the investigation, the
individual may be transferred to other alternative to detention options.

To further mitigate the risk of false results, all submissions will have 100%
human oversight, and a comparison of the ATD MCO’s results versus software
results will be conducted to assess and address potential accuracy, bias and
other performance issues associated with the software. Additionally, CBSA
Communications has been consulted to develop comprehensive and
informative materials that address potential concerns surrounding the use of
the technology and other performance issues. This approach ensures that
human judgment and discretion are applied to the results, promoting
accountability and accuracy in the system's operation.

The individual is unaware of the decision unless or until they are contacted by
the Regional Inland Enforcement office during their investigation therefore the
likelihood of the individual’s economic interests being at risk is low. The
investigation may be dealt with at a lower level by the ATD MCO or ATD MCS
or by desk investigation which would have a lower financial impact on the
individual. The ATD MCO will try to facilitate any interviews around the
individuals schedule and pose minimal financial impact to the individual thus
improving supports to individuals with accessibility needs where they do not
need to attend a CBSA office by reducing: child care cost, reduced
transportation cost and/or travel time etc.

The ATD MCO makes the final decision on whether or not the report photo is a
‘match’ or ‘no match’.  If one of the photo views fails the biometric match by
the software but the remainder of the photo views pass the biometric match,
the ATD MCO reviewing the file has the ability to make the overall decision as
a ‘match’ or ‘no match’ decision is based on the ATD MCO’s determination.

41. The impacts that the decision will have on the ongoing sustainability of an environmental
ecosystem, will likely be:
Little to no impact                                                                                                       [ Points: +1 ]

42. Please describe why the impacts resulting from the decision are as per selected option
above.
There will be positive impacts to an environmental ecosystem due to less
travel and transportation effects. CBSA currently has approximately 13,000
individuals on in-person reporting, the ability to put the individuals on remote
reporting will reduce reporting in person to a CBSA office therefore reducing
their carbon footprint.

About the Data - A. Data Source
43. Will the Automated Decision System use personal information as input data?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

44. Have you verified that the use of personal information is limited to only what is directly
related to delivering a program or service?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

45. Is the personal information of individuals being used in a decision-making process that
directly affects those individuals?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

46. Have you verified if the system is using personal information in a way that is consistent
with: (a) the current Personal Information Banks (PIBs) and Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs)
of your programs or (b) planned or implemented modifications to the PIBs or PIAs that take new
uses and processes into account?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +0 ]

47. Please list relevant PIB Bank Numbers.
CBSA PPU1801

48. What is the highest security classification of the input data used by the system? (Select one)
Protected B / Protected C                                                                                           [ Points: +3 ]

49. Who controls the data?
Federal government                                                                                                    [ Points: +1 ]

50. Will the system use data from multiple different sources?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

51. Will the system require input data from an Internet- or telephony-connected device? (e.g.
Internet of Things, sensor)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]

52. Will the system interface with other IT systems?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +4 ]
53. Who collected the data used for training the system?
A foreign government or non-government third party                                               [ Points: +4 ]

54. Who collected the input data used by the system?
Your institution                                                                                                            [ Points: +1 ]

55. Please describe the input data collected and used by the system, its source, and method of
collection.
Input data collected and used:

Source: Direct input by Individual
Method: via ReportIn app
•   First name and family name
•  UCI
•  Personal email address
•  Phone number
•  Employment information (if applicable)
o  Job title
o  Company name
o  Supervisor name
o  Email address
o  Phone number
o  Address
o  Start date
o  End date
•  Date of report
•  Ad hoc report text
•  Facial photos views (5)
At the enrollment stage, the individual provides 5 photos taken in randomized
order:
o  Looking straight ahead
o  Looking up
o  Looking down
o  Left side of the face
o  Right side of the face
At each report the individual provides 5 photos taken in randomize order:
o  Looking straight ahead
o  Looking up
o  Looking down
o  Left side of the face
o  Right side of the face

Source: Smartphone/mobile device
Method: via ReportIn app
•  Smartphone/mobile device GPS/sensor location of report
•  Smartphone/mobile device ID
•  Smartphone/mobile device model
•  Smartphone/mobile device operating system version
•  Error message and trace information
(if applicable, where error happened)

Source: Amazon Rekognition
Method: Network application program interface
•  Amazon Rekognition similarity score
Storage of information: Client Reporting and Engagement System (CRES) on
CBSA cloud servers in accordance with CBSA PPU1801.

CBSA has a contract with AWS that outlines all privacy parameters including
storage.

About the Data - B. Type of Data
56. Will the system require the analysis of unstructured data to render a recommendation or a
decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: 0 ]

57. What types of unstructured data? (Check all that apply)
Images and videos                                                                                                      [ Points: +4 ]

Section 3.2: Mitigation Questions and Answers
Consultations
1. Internal Stakeholders (federal institutions, including the federal public service)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

2. Which Internal Stakeholders have you engaged?
Access to Information and Privacy Office
Legal Services
Program Policy
Communications services
Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada
Accessibility Working Groups
2SLGBTQI+ Secretariat
Digital Policy
Data Governance
TBS Office of the Chief Information Officer
Strategic Policy and Planning

3. External Stakeholders (groups in other sectors or jurisdictions)
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

4. Which External Stakeholders have you engaged?
Clients or their Representatives
International Organizations
Civil Society
Governments in other Jurisdictions

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Data Quality
5. Do you have documented processes in place to test datasets against biases and other
unexpected outcomes? This could include experience in applying frameworks, methods,
guidelines or other assessment tools.
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

6. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

7. Have you developed a process to document how data quality issues were resolved during the
design process?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

8. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

9. Have you undertaken a Gender Based Analysis Plus of the data?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

10. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

11. Have you assigned accountability in your institution for the design, development,
maintenance, and improvement of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

12. Do you have a documented process to manage the risk that outdated or unreliable data is
used to make an automated decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

13. Is this information publicly available?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

14. Is the data used for this system posted on the Open Government Portal?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Procedural
Fairness
15. Does the audit trail identify the authority or delegated authority identified in legislation?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

16. Does the system provide an audit trail that records all the recommendations or decisions
made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

17. Are all key decision points identifiable in the audit trail?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

18. Are all key decision points within the automated system's logic linked to the relevant
legislation, policy or procedures?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

19. Do you maintain a current and up to date log detailing all of the changes made to the model
and the system?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

20. Does the system's audit trail indicate all of the decision points made by the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]
21. Can the audit trail generated by the system be used to help generate a notification of the
decision (including a statement of reasons or other notifications) where required?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

22. Does the audit trail identify precisely which version of the system was used for each
decision it supports?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

23. Does the audit trail show who an authorized decision-maker is?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

24. Is the system able to produce reasons for its decisions or recommendations when required?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

25. Is there a process in place to grant, monitor, and revoke access permission to the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

26. Is there a mechanism to capture feedback by users of the system?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

27. Is there a recourse process established for clients that wish to challenge the decision?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

28. Does the system enable human override of system decisions?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +2 ]

29. Is there a process in place to log the instances when overrides were performed?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

30. Does the system's audit trail include change control processes to record modifications to the
system's operation or performance?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

31. Have you prepared a concept case to the Government of Canada Enterprise Architecture
Review Board?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

De-Risking and Mitigation Measures - Privacy
32. If your system uses or creates personal information, have you undertaken a Privacy Impact
Assessment, or updated an existing one?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

33. Please indicate the following in your answer: Title and scope of the Privacy Impact
Assessment; How the automation project fits into the program; and Date of Privacy Impact
Assessment completion or modification.
Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA)
Remote Reporting Program

CRES/ReportIn PIA is has been completed.
The scope of this PIA is to provide an overview of the CRES/ReportIn solution
that has been established for the ATD Program, and assess the privacy risks
associated with the introduction of the CRES/ReportIn solution.
Specifically, the scope of this PIA includes the following:
•  An overview of the upcoming use of the CRES/ReportIn solution
•  Facial comparison is used as a biometric identifier

This description includes the following:
•  The systems used to support the CRES/ReportIn solution;
•  CRES/ReportIn events and subsequent activities related to evaluation and
assignment of an investigation event in the National Case Management
System;
•  The storage, retention and accessibility of CRES/ReportIn data.

In support of efforts to expand and improve ATDs, the CBSA has developed a
voluntary smartphone app called ReportIn that allows individuals subject to
immigration enforcement conditions to report to the CBSA remotely. Only
those individuals expressly required to report to the CBSA as a condition of
their release and choose ReportIn as the means of reporting will have access
to create an account.

The CBSA will be launching CRES/ReportIn in Fall 2024 on a phased-in basis
to provide enough time for the orderly transition of individuals. The app will
allow for a reduction in in-person reporting or detention in situations where no
current appropriate ATD exists. With the app, the CBSA also has an
opportunity to build a more nationally consistent ATD that will be secure and
more widely available.

The CRES/ReportIn solution is made up by the following major components:
Smartphone Application: Prior to initializing the sign up process, the individual
must download the CBSA ReportIn mobile app from either the Apple App
store or the Google Play store, based upon the individuals’ device they are
using. In order to protect the individuals’ Personal Identifiable Information
(PII), a Secure Remote Password (SRP) is used between the individuals’
device and the CRES AWS environment. Amazon Cognito is used as an
authentication provider that supports OAuth 2.0, Security Assertion Markup
Language (SAML) and SRP. The mobile app utilizes AWS Amplify to interface
with Amazon Cognito using SRP. Through the Cognito SRP protocol, the
mobile app is utilized to implement user sign-up, user sign-in, multi factor
authentication and forgot password functionality, minimizing snooping or
“Man in the Middle” attack risks.

CRES Web App & Database: The main processing and storage hub for the
ReportIn solution is the CRES database, used to store ReportIn individual
authentication data, and the web application. The web application is used by
the CBSA staff to review and manage the active cases of individuals, as well
as providing ongoing as well as historical reporting capabilities. The CRES
console is the main interface used by CBSA staff and provides the staff the
ability to manage multiple individuals and cases in a centralized location.

Facial recognition software: To validate the individual’s biometric facial data,
the app requires the individual to provide multiple biometric facial photos that
are used to identify the individual for the duration of their ATD enrollment. The
Amazon Rekognition software is used to perform this authentication/
validation requirement. The biometric facial photos are hosted in the AWS
Government in Canada (GC) Private cloud located within Canadian
datacenters to meet data residence requirements.

34. Have you designed and built security and privacy into your systems from the concept stage
of the project?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

35. Is the information used within a closed system (i.e. no connections to the Internet, Intranet
or any other system)?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]

36. If the sharing of personal information is involved, has an agreement or arrangement with
appropriate safeguards been established?
Yes                                                                                                                                [ Points: +1 ]

37. Will you de-identify any personal information used or created by the system at any point in
the lifecycle?
No                                                                                                                                 [ Points: +0 ]